# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

ISEN 635 Syllabus

Section 600 (63276) Human Information Processing Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5

Preferred Contact Method

email

## Catalog Description

Human Information Processing. (3-0). Credit 3. Perceptual and cognitive issues as related to the design of man-machine systems; perception, central processes, decision making and other performance aspects of the human component as an information processor. Prerequisite: ISEN 430 or approval of instructor.



## Additional Course Details

This course aims to provide a basic understanding of the neuropsychological processes  involved  in  human  information  processing,  models  of  basic  cognitive functions (e.g., pattern recognition, attention, and memory), and competency in a set of human-systems analysis and design methods which will be applied to a semester project. Perspectives will be introduced from several disciplines, including neuroanatomy, sensory physiology, cognitive psychology, cognitive systems engineering,  and  philosophy.  Engineering  emphases  will  include  teaching  and practice of psychophysiological methods, signal detection theory, information theory, and  mental  workload  assessment.  Through  a  semester  project,  students  will evaluate human interaction with an existing technology of their choice using these engineering  methods,  and  will  apply  user-centered  design  principles  and  other course concepts to create redesign solutions. Finally, students will practice communication skills to present their analyses and solutions.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 430 or approval of instructor.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- demonstrate applied knowledge of quantitative engineering methods applied to human information processing: psychophysics, signal detection theory, communication/information theory, and multiple resources theory.

- demonstrate an understanding of current hot topics and trends in human information processing research through review and discussion of published technical works

- apply human information processing theory and methodologies to collect human data and assess human performance and/or cognitive workload in a real world task

- demonstrate creativity and communication skills via a semester-long project with an in-class presentation

- demonstrate applied knowledge of course concepts in identifying humansystems interaction problems with an existing technology, and in proposing human-centered redesign solutions

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Recommended

Engineering Psychology and Human Performance, Fifth Edition

Authors: Wickens, C.D., Helton, W.S., Hollands, J.G., & Banbury, S.

## Grading Policy

### Grade determination

30% Homework: quantitative assignments and reading responses

50% Exams: midterm (25%) and final exam (25%)

20% Semester project: proposal (1%), written report (10%), and project presentation (9%)

Grades will be calculated according to total points earned. The points can be curved based on class average and may be lower than the following standard (out of a total of 100 percentage points).

A: 90-100% B: 80-89% C: 70-79% D: 60-69% F: 59% and lower

### Homework:

There are two general types of homework assignments in this class: quantitative problem exercises and reading responses. The quantitative assignments are designed for you to practice some of the theory and methods discussed in class. All assignments will be posted on the Canvas course page and should be submitted electronically there as well.

With few exceptions, there will be an assigned reading related to the lecture material for each topic and/or week. As a way to jump-start class discussion, you will need to submit a reading response (RR) for each required reading via Canvas by 12:00  PM (noon) the day  BEFORE the  associated  lecture,  unless  otherwise specified. These responses must include header material (name, RR, date) and two clearly distinguished sections (I suggest using the following headers):

1. Discussion point(s), which should be at least one of the following:

# A. An insightful question about the reading. Time permitting, I will address as many of these questions as I can in lecture. Please ask again in lecture and/or office hours!
# B. A comment about how the reading relates to other course concepts or to an example/anecdote from your own life experience.
1. Summary of the reading, in your own words (copying verbatim from the reading or other sources, or using generative AI to produce the summary is considered plagiarism and will be treated according to the Academic Integrity Policy). This summary is primarily meant to serve as a study aid (e.g., for reviewing for exams), and so should be organized in a way that best helps you. At a minimum, include the main messages of the reading as well as other relevant and/or interesting concepts discussed.
An RR template and grading rubric will be posted in Canvas. The lengths of each of the Discussion points and Summary sections can be flexible, but combined should be approximately 1 page in length . The reading response exercises are designed to support assimilation and retention of the course material, and also to identify emphases for me to cover in lecture. Unfortunately, there won't be time to address everyone's discussion points during the lecture period, but please be prepared to expand on your discussion point in lecture if called upon.
## Exams
There  will  be  two  written,  open-book/note  exams:  a  midterm  (25%  of  final  grade) which  is  tentatively  scheduled  for  Week  8  of  the  semester,  and  a  comprehensive final exam (25%) during finals week. Each exam will have a mixed format, which can include quantitative problems, short answer questions, and/or essays that emphasize material discussed in lecture and assigned readings. Exam dates can be flexible in cases of need but must be communicated to Dr. Ferris prior to the exam's scheduled week.
## Research report
Each student will work individually to prepare an in-depth research paper on some topic relevant to the course, due a few weeks before the end of the semester (dates
TBD). A proposal for this paper will be due around the 3 rd week of class, so that I can judge  the  relevance  and  depth  of  the  topic  and  provide  advice/guidance.  Your completed report will be critically reviewed by other students (peer-reviews), and you will similarly review others' reports. The Research report and related review work is worth 20% of the overall grade, and the quality of your report as well as reviews will be assessed. Further details on this report will be given early in the semester.
## Semester Project :
Individuals or small teams of students will complete a semester project on a topic of their choice (pending Ferris approval) to apply analytical and design methods introduced and practiced in class. Each student/group will choose a technology/interface/system with which humans interact, analyze it according to course concepts to identify problems, and apply human-centered design concepts to generate redesign solutions. Deliverables include a proposal, a written report detailing the engineering analyses and redesign solutions, and a class presentation (format TBD).
## Re-grading Policy
Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and  must  clearly indicate the  relevant  problem(s)  and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.
## Late Work Policy
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
## Course Specific Late Work Policy
Dr. Ferris does not allow anything to be submitted late without a University-excused absence. Items that are submitted after the posted due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made in accordance with university rules (https://studentrules.tamu.edu/rule07/). In these cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.
## Course Schedule
Schedule of Topics Schedule of Topics (tentative)

Date
Topic
Text and Canvas
material
Week 1
Introduction, Information processing
model
Sensation & Perception part 1
Wickens, ch. 1
Week 2
Sensation & Perception continued
Goldstein, Ch. 1
and Ch. 2
Week 3
Sensation & Perception continued
Psychophysics
Week 4
Signal Detection Theory
Vigilance
Wickens, Ch. 2 (1 st
half)

Week 5
Visual processing 1: basics, color vision
Visual processing 2: object recognition
and depth perception
Goldstein, Ch. 3;
Ch. 9
Wolfe, Ch. 4;
Goldstein, Ch. 10
Week 6
Vision continued
Attention in visual processing
Wickens, Ch. 3
Week 7
Information Theory
Wickens, Ch. 2 (2 nd
half)
Wickens, Ch. 9
(first part)
Week 8
Slack topics to prepare for Midterm
Midterm
Week 9
Audition
Wolfe, Ch. 9; Ch.
10
Week10
Memory and Learning
Wickens, Ch. 7
Week11
Timesharing and mental workload
Assessing mental workload
Wickens, Ch. 10,
11
Week12
Design for supporting Human Information
Processing
Usability
Wickens, Ch. 4
Week13
Haptics and haptic communication
Wolfe, Ch. 12
Week14
Multisensory processing and interaction
Multimodal interfaces
TBD
Week15
Project presentations
TBD
Final exam during finals week
*Note format is TBD and exam may be
offered earlier than this date/time
## Additional Course Information
### Re-grading Policy :
Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request via email to Dr. Ferris. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested regrade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.
## AI Statement
AI text generators (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.) should not be used for any work for this class without explicit permission of the instructor and appropriate attribution. This includes, but is not limited to:
- Editing your work
- Creating or revising drafts
- Reviewing a peer's work
This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.
Such use of AI text generators in this manner could be considered plagiarism and cheating according to Student Rule 20. More information may also be found at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu or you may contact your instructor if you have questions.
## Technology Support
### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
Hours: 24/7
Phone: (979) 845-8300
Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
### Canvas LMS Technical Support
Hours: 24/7/365
Phone: (877) 354-4821
Email: support@instructure.com
Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
## University Policies
This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
## University Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
## Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
## Notice of Nondiscrimination
Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU
Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
## Pregnancy Accommodations
Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
Texas A&M College Station
Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
## Free Speech and Civil Discourse
Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.