# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN630 Syllabus

Section 700 (29817) Human Operator in Complex Systems Summer 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5

Preferred Contact Method

email

## Catalog Description

Human Operator in Complex Systems. (3-0). Credit 3. Basic understanding of the theory and practice of human factors engineering; topics presented within the framework of humans as functioning systems and their requirements when incorporated in hardware and software systems.



## Additional Course Details

This  asynchronously-delivered  (i.e.,  review  materials  and  complete  assessments online, on your own time) graduate course is an overview of the discipline of human factors  engineering,  covering  topics  of  human  cognition  (perception,  attention, information processing), and human physical properties (anthropometry, physiology, biomechanical capabilities, and injury risk), and emphasizing the implications for the design of human-centered work systems. Theory and methods will be balanced with examples  drawn  from  familiar  work  domains,  including  manufacturing,  medicine, aerospace,  ground  transportation,  and  computer  interaction.  Students  will  apply course principles to design problems and a semester-long research project will allow them to explore a relevant human factors engineering topic of interest.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- demonstrate an understanding of the unique factors effecting human performance in sociotechnical systems,

- apply human factors theory to the design or selection of system elements to support human performance and safety,

- apply theory to calculate the severity of hazards due to exposure to visual, auditory, vibratory, and other environmental stimuli and identify redesign solutions for mitigating the hazards,

- apply theory to determine ideal display, control, and physical layout characteristics for supporting an operator's cognitive and physical performance,

- demonstrate communication skills in a semester-long writing assignment, and

- demonstrate applied knowledge of course concepts in identifying humansystems interaction problems with an existing technology, and in proposing redesign solutions.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Recommended

Designing for People: An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering, Third Edition.

Authors: Lee, J.D., Wickens, C.D., Liu, Y., & Ng Boyle, L.

## Grading Policy

### Grade determination

40% Assignments (homework and online quizzes) 50% Exams: midterm (25%) and final exam (25%) 10% Semester project report

Grades will be calculated according to total points earned. The points can be curved based on class average and may be lower than the following standard (out of a total of 100 percentage points).

A: 90-100% B: 80-89% C: 70-79% D: 60-69% F: 59% and lower

### Assignments

There will be approximately one Assignment (homework or quiz) released per lecture topic. These are designed to give you practice in applying methods, principles, and ideas  learned  in  the  course.  Some  but  not  all  of  the  assignments  will  be  graded. Generally,  assignments  will  be  posted  at  the  beginning  of  each  week  (Monday  or Tuesday), after that week's lecture material has been posted. All assignments will be completed  and/or  submitted  via  Canvas.  Due  dates  for  each  assignment  will  be given  when  they  are  issued,  but  typically  and  will  be  due  1  week  after  they  are posted. Unless otherwise specified, students are encouraged to work together with classmates as you complete written homework assignments (not quizzes), but every person must turn in an assignment with work shown clearly for each problem. The total  homework/quiz  grade  will  be  based  on  total  points,  not  on  the  average  of percentage grades for each entry, and this total points score will contribute to 40% of the final grade for this course.

Generally, homework and quizzes that are submitted after the due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made at the discretion of the instructor, in accordance  with  university-excused  absence  rules.  In all of  these  cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.

### Exams

There will be two exams, each worth 25% of the overall course grade. Each exam will  be  hosted  in  Canvas,  and  you  will  be  asked  to  Zoom-record  yourselves  while taking the exam (Dr. Ferris will walk through the process of doing this if you haven't done it before). The exams will be timed (75 minutes apiece) and both will be open book/note/online resources, but must be completed individually. The exams will be made available over a period of several days and can be taken at the time that is most convenient for  you.  Collaboration  on  exams  with  any  other  human  is  strictly forbidden and is considered a serious honor code violation (see Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy section below for ISEN-mandated consequences).

The format for each exam will primarily be multiple choice, true/false, or short answer, and will include a small number of problems that will require written work, which should be scanned and submitted via Canvas separately upon completing the timed exam. The exams will emphasize material discussed in lecture and practiced in  the  homework; material exclusively in the text will  not  be  tested  but  may  aid  in providing background information.

Exam dates are tentatively set to be taken during Week 6 and after Week 10. Exam dates will be flexible only in accordance with university-excused absence rules (Student Rule 7), and documentation of the reasons for the excuse is required in all cases.

### Research report

Each student will work individually to prepare an in-depth research paper on some

topic relevant to the course, due close to the end of the semester (dates TBD). A proposal for this paper will be due around the 3 rd week of class, so that I can judge

the relevance and depth of the topic and provide advice/guidance. Your completed report  will  be  critically  reviewed  by  other  students  (peer-reviews),  and  you  will similarly  review  others'  reports.  The  Research  report  and  related  review  work  is worth 10% of the overall grade, and the quality of your report as well as reviews will be assessed. Further details on this report will be given early in the semester.

### Re-grading Policy

Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and  must  clearly indicate the  relevant  problem(s)  and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Dr. Ferris does not allow anything to be submitted late without a University-excused absence. Items that are submitted after the posted due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made in accordance with university rules (https://studentrules.tamu.edu/rule07/). In these cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.

## Course Schedule

### Schedule of Topics

#### Schedule of Topics



Approximate

Week

Topic

Lessons

Text/source

material and

references

Week 1

0: Course

Introduction

0.1 Course intro

0.2 Course highlights

None

1: Introduction

to HFE

1.1 Definitions and

history

1.2 General guidelines

for design and

practice

1.3 Intro to HFE

methods

1.4 Collecting task

data

1.5 Case study

Chapter 1, 2, 3

Canvas:

Military

Standards

Week 2

2: Vision

2.1 Basics of sight and

eye anatomy

2.2 The retina, rods

and cones, light

adaptation

2.3 Refraction and

visual correction

2.4 Visual acuity, limits

of detection and

identification

2.5 Contrast and

readable text

2.6 Color vision and

color-anomalous

vision

2.7 Size and depth

cues

Chapter 4



Week 3

3: Illumination

in the

workplace

3.1 Basic photometry

3.2 Calculating

illuminance and

Lambert's Law

3.3 Luminance and

reflectance

3.4 Design for proper

illumination

Chapter 4

Semester project introduction

Week 4

4: Displays

4.1 Types of displays

4.2 Human-centered

display design

principles

4.3 Color coding and

the psychology of

color

Chapter 8

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.2

5: Controls and

Dynamics

5.1 Case study

5.2 Basic control types

5.3 Design of controls

Chapter 9

SAE Standard

J1139

6:

Documentation

and Warnings

6.1 Written information

processing

6.2 Design for

readability

6.3 Changing behavior

with warnings

6.4 Warning design

Chapter 8

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.4

Week 5

7: Hearing and

Noise

7.1 Basics of hearing

and ear anatomy

7.2 Measuring sound

7.3 Sound perception

7.4 Auditory displays

7.5 Hearing loss and

noise control

Chapter 5



Week 6

8: Supporting

Cognitive

Functions

8.1 Attention basics

8.2 Design for

attention

8.3 Memory basics

8.4 Memory encoding

and retrieval

8.5 Design for memory

8.6 Mental workload

and multitasking

8.7 Stress effects,

design to

remediate stress

Chapters 6

and 7

9: Human Error

9.1 Reason's model of

human error

9.2 Design-induced

error

9.3 Case study

9.4 Violations

9.5 Error management

and design for

error

Canvas

Human Error

package

Midterm exam on Topics 1 - 9

Week 7

10: Motor

Skills &

Control

10.1 Classification of

motor movements

10.2 Tracking and

control loops

10.3 Reaction time

and response time

10.4 Predictive models

of reaction time

10.5 Predictive models

of movement time

10.6 Descriptive

models

Chapter 9





Week 8

11:

Anthropometry

11.1 Human

dimensional

variability

11.2 Anthropometric

design

11.3 Statistical and

heuristic

anthropometric

calculations

Chapter 12

Canvas

Anthropometry

package

12: Workspace

Design

12.1 Physical

considerations

12.2 Visual and

cognitive

considerations

Week 9

13: Work

Physiology

13.1 Muscle function

and metabolic

cycle

13.2 Respiratory and

circulatory

systems

13.3 Physical

workload

measurement

Chapter 14

14:

Biomechanics

14.1 Manual material

handling and

occupational

biomechanics

14.2 Static planar

biomechanical

models

14.3 Lifting

assessment

methods

14.4 NIOSH lifting

equation

Chapter 13



Week 10

15:

Environmental

Stressors

15.1 Motion stressors

15.2 Air quality

stressors and

ventilation

15.3 Thermal stressors

Chapter 15

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.5

16: Cumulative

Trauma

Disorders

16.1 CTD definitions,

statistics, and risk

factors

16.2 CTDs of the

fingers

16.3 CTDs of the hand

and wrist

16.4 CTDs of the

elbow and

shoulder

16.5 CTDs of the neck

and back

16.6 Tool selection and

ergonomic design

to reduce CTD risk

Chapter 13

Final exam focusing on Topics 10 - 16

## Additional Course Information

### Re-grading Policy :

Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request via email to Dr. Ferris. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested regrade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.

## AI Statement

AI text generators (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.) should not be used for any work for this class without explicit permission of the instructor and appropriate attribution. This includes, but is not limited to:

- Editing your work

- Creating or revising drafts

- Reviewing a peer's work

This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.

Such use of AI text generators in this manner could be considered plagiarism and cheating according to Student Rule 20. More information may also be found at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu or you may contact your instructor if you have questions.

## Technology Support

### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus

Hours: 24/7

Phone: (979) 845-8300

Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu

Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help

### Canvas LMS Technical Support

Hours: 24/7/365

Phone: (877) 354-4821

Email: support@instructure.com

Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.

Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.

## University Policies

This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.

## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy

'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'

'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).

You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.

## University Attendance Policy

The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

## Makeup Work Policy

Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).

'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).

Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)

## Notice of Nondiscrimination

Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.

Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.

The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.

## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies

Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.

Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.

Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.

## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy

Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.

To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:

- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.

- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.

- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.

- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.

If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.

## Pregnancy Accommodations

Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.

Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.

## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness

Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.

Texas A&M College Station

Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.

## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)

FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.

Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.

Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.

Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.

## Free Speech and Civil Discourse

Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.