# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 660 Syllabus

Section 600 (63233) Risk Engineering Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 12:45PM

End Time: 2:00PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 261

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Nancy Currie-Gregg

Email:

currie-gregg@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4080 | ZACH 510C

Phone:

979-458-2342

Office Hours

Monday/Thursday 3:00-4:00 p.m.

### Preferred Contact Method

Communication with the instructor throughout the semester is highly encouraged. Students needing assistance should attend office hours with either the instructor or GTA. Additionally, to provide timely responses to student questions and rapid delivery of announcements to the class, an MS Teams site will be established and used throughout the semester. All students must have access to MS Teams and accept the invitation to join the course site. Communication via MS Teams is highly preferred instead of email.



Any communications with the instructor that contain personal information must be done via private chat through MS Teams. MS Teams chats/messages may also be used for student-student communications or to post questions to the entire class or sub-groups.

### Webpage: https://safe.engr.tamu.edu/ Biography

Dr. Nancy Currie-Gregg is the Director of the Texas A&M University Space Institute. As the Don Lummus '58 Professor of Practice in Engineering, she holds joint appointments in the Departments of Aerospace Engineering and Industrial and Systems Engineering at Texas A&M University's College of Engineering. Internationally recognized for her human-system integration, safety engineering, and risk management expertise, her research focuses on optimizing human performance and safety in aerospace systems. She also serves on the National Academies Board of Human Systems Integration and the Board of Directors for the Texas Space Commission.

Dr. Currie-Gregg spent the majority of her career supporting NASA's human spaceflight programs. A former NASA astronaut, she flew on four space shuttle missions, logging over 1,000 hours in space, and made significant contributions to the development of human spaceflight operations. Following the Space Shuttle Columbia tragedy, she managed the Space Shuttle Program Safety and Mission Assurance Office, overseeing the agency's return-to-flight efforts. She later served as Principal Engineer and Chief Engineer with the NASA Engineering and Safety Center, where she led independent engineering assessments for high-risk human spaceflight initiatives. A retired U.S. Army Colonel and Master Army Aviator, she accrued more than 4,000 flight hours in both rotary- and fixed-wing aircraft.

Dr. Currie-Gregg holds a Bachelor's degree in Biological Sciences with honors from The Ohio State University, a Master of Science in Safety Engineering from the University of Southern California, and a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Houston.

### Socials

[https://www.linkedin.com/in/curriegregg/](https://www.linkedin.com/in/curriegregg/)

## Catalog Description

Risk Engineering. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental concepts, techniques, and applications of risk assessment and risk management for engineering systems; current industry practices for risk assessment of industrial facilities using qualitative and quantitative approaches are demonstrated through exercises and case studies from diverse engineering fields. Prerequisites: Graduate classification. Cross-listed with CHEN 660 and SENG 660.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): Graduate classification. Cross Listing: CHEN 660 and SENG 660.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Apply appropriate probabilistic methods to evaluate component and system reliabilities. Analyze reliability estimates to recommend preferred system designs to minimize risk.

- Develop scenario models or logic trees (i.e., fault trees, event trees, failure modes and effects analysis, and Bayesian network models) to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate potential undesired outcomes in engineered systems. Evaluate results to recommend engineering solutions to reduce risk.

- Understand and apply quantitative methods for uncertainty analysis. Demonstrate methods to effectively communicate uncertainties associated with risk-informed decision-making.

- Use analytical or computational risk analysis techniques to develop a comprehensive, quantitative risk analysis of a real-world case study or problem.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials





This material Is: Required

Reliability and Risk Analysis

ISBN:

9781000864137

Authors:

Mohammad Modarres, Katrina Groth

Publisher:

CRC Press

Publication Date:

2023-04-26

Edition:

2nd Ed.

Notes:

E-book available through TAMU library

This material Is: Required

An Introduction to Reliability and Maintainability Engineering

ISBN:

9781478639336

Authors:

Charles E. Ebeling

Publisher:

Waveland Press

Publication Date:

2019-04-12

Edition:

3rd. Ed.

## Additional Instructional Materials



This Material is: Optional

Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers, WileyPLUS

ISBN:

9781119758723

Authors:

Douglas C. Montgomery, George C. Runger

Publisher:

Wiley

Publication Date:

2020-07-08

Edition:

7e

## Grading Policy

Your performance in the course is evaluated via multiple learning activities (exams, homework, a project, and lecture activities). The final course grade will be determined via the following weights:

### Course grading components



Method of Evaluation

Percent of Grade

Exams (Exam 1: 25%; Exam 2: 25%)

50%

Homework

30%

Project

15%

Activities

05%

### Grading scale (based on weighted total)



Grade

Range

A

90-100%

B

80-89%

C

70-79%

D

60-69%

F

&lt;60%

#### URL for Resource: https://education.wiley.com Notes:

This is a self-paced review for probability and statistics that is available via a WileyPlus course. Students can use this resource to ensure they have an appropriate probability and statistics background for success in this course.

Note: Students may register for a free two-week trial account on WileyPlus. If access is desired for an extended period, there is a minimal fee for a student license for five months of access to the WileyPlus course. Alternatively, lifetime access to the e-book is also available.

### Exams

There will be two exams during the course. All exams will be administered electronically, and students will be allowed to access the course textbooks, course notes, and software tools. Students are encouraged to develop their own reference/equation sheets and/or software tools to use during the exam. Only course resources, or those created by the individual student, may be accessed during the exam. All students must strictly adhere to the Aggie Honor Code during examinations. Per the course AI Statement contained in this syllabus, the use of AI tools during exams is strictly prohibited.

### Exam Re-grading Policy

Students have 24 hours following the release of exam grades to resubmit corrected solutions for quantitative problems only for re-grading. This policy applies to errors in the student's original solution, not instructor grading errors. Non-quantitative and extra credit problems are not eligible for re-grading and will be clearly denoted as such on each exam. If a resubmitted solution is complete, fully correct, and shows all work to derive the new solution, the student may earn up to 50% of the points originally deducted for that problem, with a maximum of 20 total points recovered per exam.

The re-grading period is considered part of the exam period. Students must work on the corrections individually and MAY NOT consult with any other person, including current/former students, teaching assistants, graders, or professors, when developing their corrections. Any violation of this policy will be considered cheating and a violation of the Aggie Honor Code.

### Homework

There will be homework assignments during the course. Instructions, due dates and times, and points associated with each homework assignment will be announced during lectures and through Canvas. Study groups are encouraged, but each student is responsible for developing solutions and submitting them electronically via Canvas. No paper copies will be accepted.

### Project

This course includes a semester-long group project to analyze and present a quantitative risk analysis of an engineered system using the techniques and methods discussed in the course. Student groups (typically 3 students) will be formed by the instructor, based on the students' stated area(s) of interest.

The final deliverables for the course project are a written report and a presentation. Details regarding specific formats and requirements for all course project deliverables will be presented during lectures and also posted on Canvas. The grading rubric for evaluating the report and presentation will be posted on Canvas well in advance of the report due date.

### Lecture Activities

This course will utilize active learning methods during lecture periods, including group activities. To incentivize course participation and encourage student engagement, all students who attend a lecture and complete the associated lecture activity will be given full credit.

No late lecture activities will be accepted. If a student misses an activity due to a university-excused absence (see Student Rule 7), and has notified the instructor, in writing, in advance of the absence, they may complete and submit the activity for credit by 5:00 p.m. CT the day following the lecture period in which the activity was completed.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Homework and case study assignments submitted after the due date/time will not receive total credit, unless due to a university-excused absence (see attendance policy). Points will be deducted for assignments submitted past the due date and time on Canvas-equivalent to 20% of the total points possible for each day, or portion thereof, past the due date. Assignments submitted more than five days after the due date will not be accepted and a score of zero will be recorded for the assignment.

## Course Schedule

### Course topics



Topics

Topics

Elements of risk analysis and risk

mitigation

System risk analysis

Probability & statistics for risk analysis

Bayes networks/models

Component reliability analysis

Developing quantitative risk models

System reliability, maintainability, and

availability analysis

Case studies

### Course Schedule



Week

Topics

1

Elements of risk analysis and risk mitigation

2

Probability & statistics for risk analysis

3-5

Measuring risk: Component reliability analysis

6

Developing failure probabilities

Exam 1

7-8

Measuring risk: System reliability, availability, and maintainability

analysis

9-10

System risk assessment methods

11

Bayesian network development and analysis

Exam 2

12

Risk communication, Human Reliability Analysis (HRA)

13

Case study

## Additional Course Information

### Course materials and copyright:

The materials used in this course are copyrighted. "Materials" includes all items produced for this course, such as the syllabus, detailed course schedule, lecture slides, online lecture videos, homework or exam questions and solutions, and additional resources posted on the course site by the instructor. You may not copy or distribute these materials unless expressly granted permission by the author.

## Technology Support

### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus

Hours: 24/7

Phone: (979) 845-8300

Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu

Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help

### Canvas LMS Technical Support

Hours: 24/7/365

Phone: (877) 354-4821

Email: support@instructure.com

Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.

Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.

## University Policies

This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.

## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy

'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'

'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).

You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.

## University Attendance Policy

The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

## Makeup Work Policy

Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).

'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).

Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)

## Notice of Nondiscrimination

Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.

Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.

The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.

## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies

Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.

Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.

Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.

## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy

Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.

To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:

- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU

Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.

- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.

- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.

- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.

If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.

## Pregnancy Accommodations

Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.

Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.

## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness

Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.

Texas A&M College Station

Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.

## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)

FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.

Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.

Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.

Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.