# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 625 Syllabus

Section 600 (55586) Simulation Methods and Applications Spring 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 09:35AM

End Time: 10:25AM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LAB

Meeting Days: M

Start Time: 1:50PM

End Time: 4:20PM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ETB 2026

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

David Eckman

Email:

eckman@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4014

Phone:

979-458-2380

Office Hours

TBD



## Catalog Description

Simulation Methods and Applications. (2-3). Credit 3. Fundamental methodologies of simulation modeling; random number and variate generation, statistical analysis of model output, and discrete event modeling using a commercial simulation language. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand the fundamental methodologies of discrete event (processoriented) simulation modeling.

- Understand the key statistical issues involved in simulation data preparation and the analysis of simulation output.

- Become familiar with modeling using both a general-purpose language (Python) and a commercial language (Simio).

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Recommended

Foundations and Methods of Stochastic Simulation: A First Course

Authors:

Barry L. Nelson and Linda Pei

URL for Resource:

https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/tamucs/detail.action?docID=1082095

This material Is: Recommended

Simulation Modeling and Analysis

ISBN:

978-0-07-340132-4

Authors:

Averill M. Law

This material Is: Recommended

Simio and Simulation: Modeling, Analysis, Applications

Authors:

Jeffrey S. Smith and David T. Sturrock

URL for Resource:

https://textbook.simio.com/SASMAA7/

This material Is: Recommended

Discrete-Event Simulation

ISBN:

978-0136062127

Authors:

Jerry Banks, John S. Carson II, Barry L. Nelson, and David M. Nicol

Edition:

5th

## Grading Policy

Grades will be based on attendance, participation, lab assignments, quizzes, a midterm exam, and a final exam:

- Attendance 4%

- Participation 6%

- Homework: 0%

- Lab Assignments: 10%

- Quizzes: 10%

- Midterm Exam: 35%

- Final Exam: 35%

Attendance: Attendance will be taken during each lecture and is worth 4% of the final grade. You will receive 4% if you attend at least four-fifths of the lectures, 3% if you attend between three-fifths and four-fifths of the lectures, 2% if you attend between two-fifths and three-fifths of the lectures, 1% if you attend between onefifth and two-fifths of the lectures, and 0% if you attend fewer than one-fifth of the lectures. Excluding exam dates, there are expected to be about 28-29 lectures in the term.

Participation: Your participation in these lectures will be worth 6% of the final grade. You will receive 1% every time you ask/answer a question, up to 6 times throughout the semester. In any given class session, you can earn up to a maximum of 1%, i.e., asking/answering more than one question in a lecture will only count as one point of participation.

Homework: There will be (roughly) bi-weekly homework assignments. Assignments and solutions will be posted as Jupyter notebooks on Canvas. Homework will not be collected or graded.

Lab Assignments: There will be exercises to be completed during the weekly labs. These will be graded for completion, not correctness. You will receive 1 point for each completed lab exercise up to a maximum of 10 points, i.e., you are expected to complete 10 of the lab exercises.

Quizzes: There will also be short quizzes given during the weekly labs. These will be graded for correctness. Your 10 highest quiz scores will be counted.

Midterm and Final Exam: The midterm and final exams will consist of freeresponse questions testing critical thinking and quantitative reasoning. The midterm exam is scheduled for Monday, March 16 from 1:50-3:50pm in ETB 2026. The final exam is scheduled for Thursday, April 30 from 12:30pm-2:30pm in ZACH 345. If you are unable to take the exams at the scheduled times for a valid reason (e.g., serious illness or family emergency), you must inform me as soon as possible and provide proof.

Grades: Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas. Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within five business days of the return of the graded material. No grade review request will be accepted beyond this period.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Schedule

Tentative schedule.



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

1

M

Jan

12

Lab 1

Simulation by hand

1

T

Jan

13

Lecture

1

Syllabus and introduction to simulation

1

R

Jan

15

Lecture

2

Basics of discrete-event simulation

2

M

Jan

19

-

NO CLASS: MLK DAY

2

T

Jan

20

Lecture

3

Review of probability and statistics

Instructor

travel

2

R

Jan

22

Lecture

4

Review of probability and statistics

Instructor

travel

3

M

Jan

26

Lab 2

Introduction to simulation in Python

3

T

Jan

27

Lecture

5

Conceptual modeling

3

R

Jan

29

Lecture

6

Input analysis - input modeling, no data

4

M

Feb 2

Lab 3

Introduction to simulation in Simio

4

T

Feb 3

Lecture

7

Input analysis - histograms and kernel density

estimation

4

R

Feb 5

Lecture

8

Input analysis - empirical data and resampling

5

M

Feb 9

Lab 4

Simulating a pull (Kanban) system

5

T

Feb

10

Lecture

9

Input analysis - parameter estimation (MLE)

5

R

Feb

12

Lecture

10

Input analysis - visualization and Q-Q plots



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

6

M

Feb

16

Lab 5

Data tables, non-stationary arrival process,

branching

6

T

Feb

17

Lecture

11

Input analysis - Q-Q plots

6

R

Feb

19

Lecture

12

Input analysis - chi-square test

7

M

Feb

23

Lab 6

Counting, branching, custom run setup, plots,

interpreting results

7

T

Feb

24

Lecture

13

Input analysis - K-S test

7

R

Feb

26

Lecture

14

Input analysis - arrival processes

8

M

Mar 2

Lab 7

User defined statistics

8

T

Mar 3

Lecture

15

Input analysis - arrival processes

8

R

Mar 5

Lecture

16

Random-variate generation - uniform random

variates

9

M

Mar 9

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

9

T

Mar

10

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

9

R

Mar

12

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

10

M

Mar

16

Exam

MIDTERM EXAM at 1:50-3:50pm in ETB

2026

10

T

Mar

17

Lecture

17

Random-variate generation - inversion

10

R

Mar

19

Lecture

18

Random-variate generation - acceptance

rejection

11

M

Mar

23

Lab 8

Introduction to processes

11

T

Mar

24

Lecture

19

Random-variate generation - arrival processes

11

R

Mar

26

Lecture

20

Verification

12

M

Mar

30

Lab 9

Use of lists, reliability logic

12

T

Mar

31

Lecture

21

Validation

12

R

Apr 2

Lecture

22

Output analysis - confidence intervals



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

13

M

Apr 6

Lab 10

Sequences, transporters, linking with data

tables

13

T

Apr 7

Lecture

23

Output analysis - bootstrapping

13

R

Apr 9

Lecture

24

Output analysis - error vs risk + visualization

14

M

Apr

13

Lab 11

Work schedule, function, use of processes

14

T

Apr

14

Lecture

25

Output analysis - terminating simulation

14

R

Apr

16

Lecture

26

Output analysis - system comparison

15

M

Apr

20

Lab 12

Simulation-based optimization (OptQuest and

KN method)

15

T

Apr

21

Lecture

27

Output analysis - common random numbers

15

R

Apr

23

Lecture

28

Simulation-based optimization (OptQuest and

KN method)

16

M

Apr

27

Review Review session

16

T

Apr

28

Lecture

29

Simulation-based optimization

16

R

Apr

30

Exam

FINAL EXAM at 12:30-2:30pm in ZACH 345

Registrar's

scheduled

final exam

date

## Additional Course Information

Copyright: All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, 'documents' means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, slides, homework and lab assignments, solutions, and all materials appearing on the class website. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit enterprise. Any use of or upload to the website Coursehero (or similar) for course materials will be treated as an academic code violation.

## Technology Support

Jupyter Notebooks: All homework assignments will be released as Jupyter notebooks. There are two methods for running Python code in Jupyter notebooks:

1. Local Installation: Download Anaconda, an all-in-one installer for Python with associated packages; see this Software Carpentry tutorial for installation instructions for Windows, Mac OS X, or Linux. Once installed, open the Anaconda Navigator program on your computer, find the Jupyter Notebook application on the home page, and click Launch. You can then navigate to the relevant folder on your computer to access or create Jupyter notebooks.
2. Remote Server: Use Google Colaboratory to access and run Jupyter notebooks saved in your Google Drive. Because the notebooks will be run on one of Google's servers, you do not need a local installation of Python.
Simio Software: We will be using Simio software for the lab demonstrations. The software is available through the Engineering Virtual Labs.
### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
Hours: 24/7
Phone: (979) 845-8300
Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
### Canvas LMS Technical Support
Hours: 24/7/365
Phone: (877) 354-4821
Email: support@instructure.com
Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
### University Policies
This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
### Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
### University Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
### Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
### Notice of Nondiscrimination
Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
### Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
### Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU
Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
### Pregnancy Accommodations
Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
### Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
Texas A&M College Station
Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
### Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
### Free Speech and Civil Discourse
Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.