# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

ISEN 667 Syllabus

Section 700 (47617) Engineering Economy Fall 2026 - College Station



## Course Information

Credit Hours:

3

### Course Description and Topics

Fundamental concepts and advanced techniques of engineering economic analysis; evaluation of alternative capital investments considering income taxes, depreciation and inflation; discounted cash flow analysis of competing projects, break-even analysis and determination of rate of return on investment; risk and uncertainty in engineering analysis.

Subjects covered in this course include:

Chapter 1: Foundations of Engineering Economy

Chapter 2: Factors: How Time and Interest Affect Money

Chapter 3: Combining Factors

Chapter 4: Nominal and Effective Interest Rates

Chapter 5: Analysis Using Present Worth and Future Worth Values

Chapter 6: Annual Worth Analysis

Chapter 7: Rate of Return Analysis, One Project

Chapter 8: Rate of Return Analysis, Multiple Alternatives

Chapter 9: Benefit/Cost Analysis and Public Sector Economics

Chapter 12: Independent Projects with Budget Limitation

Chapter 13: Breakeven and Payback Analysis

Chapter 16: Depreciation and Depletion Methods

Chapter 19: Decision Making Under Risk

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Hamid Parsaei

Email:

hamid.parsaei@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4068A

Phone:

979-458-2353

Email:

hamid.parsaei@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4068A

Phone:

979-458-2353

Office Hours

## Catalog Description

Engineering Economy. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental concepts and advanced techniques of engineering economic analysis; evaluation of alternative capital investments considering income taxes, depreciation and inflation; discounted cash flow analysis of competing projects, break-even analysis and determination of rate of return on investment; risk and uncertainty in engineering analysis. Prerequisite: ISEN 303 or approval of instructor; also taught at Qatar campus.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 303 or approval of instructor; also taught at Qatar campus.

## Course Learning Outcomes

### Course Learning Outcomes

#### Chapter 1:

1. Define engineering economics and time value of money, identify areas of application study approach
2. Understand and identify the steps in an engineering economy study
3. Identify areas in which economic decisions can challenge good ethics
4. Perform calculations for interest rate and rates of return
5. Identify and use engineering economic terminology and symbols
6. Understand cash flows and know how to graphically represent them
7. Describe and calculate economic equivalence
8. Calculate simple and compound interest amounts for one or more time periods
9. State the meaning and role of Minimum Attractive Rate of Return (MARR), Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC), and opportunity cost
10. Identify types of information obtainable using engineering economy formulas and tools.
## Chapter 2:
1. Derive and use factors for single amounts-compound amount ( F / P) and present worth ( P / F) Factors
2. Derive and use factors for uniform series- present worth ( P / A) and capital recovery ( A / P) Factors
3.  Derive and use factors for uniform series - compound amount ( F / A) and and sinking fund ( A / F) Factors
4. Use linear interpolation in factor tables
5. Arithmetic Gradient
6. Geometric Gradient
7. Use equivalence relations to determine i (interest rate) or n for a cash flow series.
    ## Chapter 4:
1. Understand interest rate statements that include nominal and effective rate
2. Derive and use the formula for effective annual interest rates
3. Determine interest rate for any stated time period
4. Determine payment period (PP) and compounding period (CP) for equivalence calculations
5. Perform equivalence calculations for single-amount cash flows and PP greater or equal CP
6. Make calculations for series and gradient cash flows with PP ≥ CP
7. Perform equivalence calculations when PP &lt; CP
8. Derive and use the effective interest rate formula for interest rates that are compounded continuously
9. Perform equivalency calculations for interest rates that vary from one time period to another
        ## Chapter 5:
1. Identifying mutually exclusive and independent projects; define revenue and cost alternatives
2. Select the best of equal-life alternatives using present worth analysis
3. Select the best of different-life alternatives using present worth analysis
4. Select the best alternative using future worth analysis
5. Select the best alternative using capitalized cost analysis
            ## Chapter 6:
1. Advantages of A W: Demonstrate that the Annual Worth value is the same for each life cycle
2. Capital Recovery and A W Values: Calculate and interpret the capital recovery (CR) and AW amounts
3. A W Analysis: Select the best alternative using an annual worth analysis
4. Perpetual Life and A W Analysis: Evaluate alternatives with very long lives using AW analysis
5. Life-Cycle Cost Analysis: Perform a life-cycle cost (LCC) analysis using AW methods
                ## Chapter 7:
2. Use a PW or AW relation to determine the internal R O R (IROR) of a series of cash flows
3. State the difficulties of using the ROR method, relative to the PW and AW methods
4. Determine the maximum number of possible ROR values and their values for a specific cash flow series
5. Calculate the nominal and effective rate of return for a bond investment
                    ## Chapter 8:
1. State why the R O R method of comparing alternatives requires an incremental cash flow analysis
2. Calculate the incremental cash flow series for two alternatives
3. Interpret the meaning of the incremental ROR determined from the incremental cash flow series
4. Select the best from several alternatives using incremental ROR analysis
                        ## Chapter 9:
1. Explain difference in public vs. private sector projects
2. Calculate B/C ratio for single project
3. Select better of two alternatives using B/C method
4. Select best of multiple alternatives using B/C method
5. Use cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) to evaluate service sector projects
6. Describe how ethical compromises may enter public sector projects
                        ## Chapter 12:
1. Capital rationing basics
2. Projects with equal lives
3. Projects with unequal lives
4. Linear program model
5. Ranking options
                        ### Chapter 13:
1. Breakeven point - one parameter
2. Breakeven point - two alternatives
3. Payback period analysis
                        ### Chapter 16:
1. Understand basic terms of asset depreciation
2. Apply straight line method of depreciation
3. Apply DB and DDB methods of depreciation; switch between DDB and SL methods
4. Apply MACRS method of depreciation
5. Select asset recovery period for MACRS
6. Explain depletion and apply cost depletion & percentage depletion methods
                        ### Chapter 19:
1. Understand decision making under risk
2. Construct probability distributions and cumulative distributions
3. Take random sample from a distribution
4. Estimate expected value and standard deviation from random sample
5. Use Monte Carlo sampling for simulation analysis to evaluate alternatives
                        ### Special Course Designation
                        None
                        ### Textbook and/or Resource Materials
                        This material Is: Required
                        Required Text: Engineering Economy
                        ISBN:
                        978-1-264-IS809-6
                        Authors:
                        Leland Blank and Anthony Tarquin
                        Publisher:
                        McGraw Hill
                        Publication Date:
                        9th Edition (2024)
                        ### Grading Policy
                        #### Course Grade :
                        Exam 1   100 Points Exam 2  100 Points Exam 3 100 Points Homework  100 Points
                        #### Exam Dates :
                        Exam 1 (format: Take home)  Friday, October 2 nd , 2026
                        Exam 2 (format: Take home)   Friday, October 30 th , 2026
                        Exam 3 (format: Take home)  Friday, November 27 th , 2026
                        ### Late Work Policy
                        Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
                        ### Course Specific Late Work Policy
                        #### Makeup Policy:
                        If an absence is excused, the instructor will either provide the student with an opportunity to make up an exam or other work that contributes to the final grade or provide a satisfactory alternative by a date agreed upon by the student and instructor. If the instructor has a regularly scheduled makeup exam, students are expected to attend unless they have a university-approved excuse.
                        The makeup work must be completed in a timeframe not to exceed 30 calendar days from the last day of the initial absence .
                        The student is responsible for providing satisfactory evidence to the instructor to substantiate the reason for the absence. Among the reasons absences are considered excused by the university are the following (see Student Rule 7 for details http://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07 ). The fact that these are universityexcused absences does not relieve the student of responsibility for prior notification and documentation. Failure to notify and/or document properly may result in an unexcused absence. Falsification of documentation is a violation of the Honor Code.
1. Participation in an activity that is required for a class and appears on the university authorized activity list at https://stuactonline.tamu.edu/app/sponsauth/index
2. Death or major illness in a student's immediate family.
3. Illness of a dependent family member.
4. Participation in legal proceedings or administrative procedures that require a student's presence.
5. Religious holy day. NOTE: Prior notification is NOT required.
6. Injury or illness that is too severe or contagious for the student to attend class. a) Injury or illness of three or more class days: Student will provide a medical confirmation note from his or her medical provider within one week of the last date of the absence (see Student Rules 7.1.6.1)
7. Injury or illness of less than three class days: Student will provide one or both of these (at instructor's discretion), within one week of the last date of the absence:
                                - (i.)Texas A&M University Explanatory Statement for Absence from Class form available at http://attendance.tamu.edu
                                - (ii.) Confirmation of visit to a health care professional affirming date and time of visit.
                            ### a. An absence for a non-acute medical service does not constitute an excused absence.
                            #### b. Required participation in military duties.
                            ### c. Mandatory admission interviews for professional or graduate school that cannot be rescheduled.
                            ### d. Mandatory participation as a student-athlete in NCAA-sanctioned competition.
                            ### e. In accordance with Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972, Texas A&M University shall treat pregnancy (childbirth, false pregnancy,
                            termination of pregnancy and recovery therefrom) and related conditions as a justification for an excused absence for so long a period of time as is deemed medically necessary by the student's physician. Requests for excused absence related to pregnancy should be directed to the instructor.
                            Other absences may be excused at the discretion of the instructor with prior notification and proper documentation.
                            In cases where prior notification is not feasible (e.g., accident or emergency) the student must provide notification by the end of the second working day after the absence, including an explanation of why notice could not be sent prior to the class.
                            Accommodations sought for absences due to the observance of a religious holiday can be sought either prior or after the absence, but not later than two working days after the absence.
                            #### Course Schedule
                            ##### Weekly Recitation:
                            Fridays 3:00 - 4:00 PM
                            #### Technology Support
                            Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
                            Hours: 24/7
                            Phone: (979) 845-8300
                            Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
                            Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
                            ##### Canvas LMS Technical Support
                            Hours: 24/7/365
                            Phone: (877) 354-4821
                            Email: support@instructure.com
                            Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
                            Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
                            #### University Policies
                            This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
                            #### Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
                            'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
                            'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
                            You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
                            #### University Attendance Policy
                            The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
                            Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
                            #### Makeup Work Policy
                            Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
                            Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
                            Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
                            'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
                            Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
                            #### Course Specific Makeup Work Policy
                            ##### Makeup Policy:
                            If an absence is excused, the instructor will either provide the student with an opportunity to make up an exam or other work that contributes to the final grade or provide a satisfactory alternative by a date agreed upon by the student and instructor. If the instructor has a regularly scheduled makeup exam, students are expected to attend unless they have a university-approved excuse.
                            The makeup work must be completed in a timeframe not to exceed 30 calendar days from the last day of the initial absence .
                            #### Notice of Nondiscrimination
                            Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
                            Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
                            The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
                            #### Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
                            Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
                            Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
                            Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
                            #### Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
                            Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
                            To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
                                - Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
                                - Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
                                - Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
                                - Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
                            If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
                            #### Pregnancy Accommodations
                            Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
                            Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
                            #### Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
                            Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
Texas A&M College Station
                            Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
                            #### Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
                            FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
                            Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
                            Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
                            Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
                            #### Free Speech and Civil Discourse
                            Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.
1. State and understand the meaning of rate of return (R O R)