# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 620 Syllabus

Section 601 (52745) Survey of Optimization Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 3:55PM

End Time: 5:10PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

David Gutman

Email:

dhgutman@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4075

Phone:

979-458-2339

Office Hours

TBD

Preferred Contact Method

Email (Do not call)

## Catalog Description

Survey of Optimization. (3-0). Credit 3. Theory and numerical methods for deterministic linear and nonlinear optimization; topics include linear programming, unconstrained-nonlinear optimization, constrained-nonlinear optimization, Lagrange and K-K-T conditions, and numerical algorithms. Prerequisite: MATH 304 or MATH 311.

<!-- image -->

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s):

MATH 304 or MATH 311.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Analyze and apply linear and nonlinear programming theory and algorithms.

- Formulate linear and nonlinear optimization models from real-world problems.

- Solve small-scale optimization problems by hand and utilize optimization software to solve large-scale problems.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

<!-- image -->

## Grading Policy

### Assessments

Your grade will be based upon:

# 1. Midterm I (25% of total grade subject to replacement) : You will have a midterm that will occur during one of the lectures in roughly late September/early October. See replacement policy under Final Exam, Part I. If you are unable to take this exam for any reason then your Final Exam, Part I grade will replace it.
## 2. Midterm II (25% of total grade subject to replacement) : You will have a midterm that will occur during one of the recitation periods located roughly in the middle of November. See replacement policy under Final Exam, Part I.
## 3. Final Exam, Part I (25% of total grade) : The final exam will have two sections that will be graded separately. The first section will cover the same material as midterm I. If your grade on this part exceeds your grade on midterm I, then it will also replace your midterm I grade.
### 4. Final Exam, Part II (25% of total grade) : The second section will cover the same material as midterm II. If your grade on this part exceeds your grade on midterm II, then it will also replace your midterm II grade.
Attendance is not graded.
#### Grading
Letter grades will be determined according to the following numeric scale. Grading Scheme
This material Is: Recommended
Operations Research
Authors:
Wayne L. Winston, Jeffrey B. Goldberg Letter grades may be curved upward to reflect the performance of the entire class.
|    |
|----|
Letter Grade
Total Score
A
&gt;90%
B
80-89.99%
C
70-79.99%
D
60-69.99%
F
&lt;60%
#### Late Work Policy
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
#### Course Specific Late Work Policy
Late work is accepted under no circumstances except those dictated by university and student rules.
#### Course Schedule
##### Course Schedule
##### Course Schedule
|    |
|----|
Unit
#
Title
1
Introduction
2
Basic Optimization Modeling
3
Introduction to Gurobi
4
Classic Problems, Part I
5
Classic Problems, Part II
6
Graphical LP Solving
7
Simplex Method
8
Sensitivity Analysis
9
IP Modeling
10
Networks
|    |
|----|
Unit
#
Title
11
IP Algorithms
12
Non-linear Programming
##### Tentative Exam Dates
Midterm Exam #1: 10/27
Midterm Exam #2: 11/24
#### Additional Course Information
##### Ungraded Homework
Each course topic may be accompanied by an optional, ungraded homework. I will not post solutions to the homework. However, we will offer feedback on your (optionally) submitted solutions. This is you best opportunity to get feedback on your understanding of course material. I must emphasize that turning in or not turning in the optional homework will have NO impact on your grade. Moreover, your performance on the homework will have no impact on your grade.
These homeworks must be turned in by the assigned deadline.
##### Electronic Device Use Policy
The use of any and all electronic devices is explicitly forbidden with a single exception. You may use an tablet or laptop computer to take notes but only if you sit in one of the front X rows, where the number X will be determined by the conclusion of the second class session. If you are sitting in one of these rows and using one of your devices for tasks other than note taking then this will be considered an electronic device use policy violation.
The first electronic device use policy violation will result in a warning. Each subsequent violation will result in a one letter course grade deduction.
##### Academic Integrity
Any instance of cheating or plagiarism will be referred to the Aggie Honor Council. The recommended penalty will be failure of the course.
#### Technology Support
Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
Hours: 24/7
Phone: (979) 845-8300
Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
##### Canvas LMS Technical Support
Hours: 24/7/365
Phone: (877) 354-4821
Email: support@instructure.com
Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
#### University Policies
This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
#### Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
#### University Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
#### Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
#### Notice of Nondiscrimination
Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M
does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
#### Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
#### Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
#### Pregnancy Accommodations
Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
#### Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
##### Texas A&M College Station
Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
#### Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
#### Free Speech and Civil Discourse
Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.