# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 616 Syllabus

Section 700 (39910) Design and Analysis of Industrial Experiments Spring 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ONLINE ONLINE

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Rui Tuo

Email:

ruituo@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4012

Phone:

979-458-2345

Office Hours

9:30-11 am MW or by appointment

Preferred Contact Method

Email

## Catalog Description

Design and Analysis of Industrial Experiments. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental theory, concepts and procedures required for industrial experimental design, statistical data analysis, and model building, with emphasis on engineering formulations and applications; one-factor experiments with and without restrictions on randomization, treatment comparison procedures, Latin and other squares, factorial experiments, full and fractional two-level factorial experiments, blocking in factorial designs, response surface methodologies and introduction to Taguchi methods. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.

<!-- image -->

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

Participants will be assumed to have basic knowledge in statistics, including parameter estimation, hypothesis testing and confidence intervals. Read the pre-course reading materials to refresh your knowledge.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand formulations, concepts, and analytical procedures for design and analysis of industrial experiments;

- Understand fundamental principles of design and off-line experimentation techniques;

- Apply design tools in industrial applications;

- Evaluate data-collecting, and experiment planning capability.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

### This material Is: Required

Experiments: Planning, Analysis and Optimization, 3nd Edition (by C. F. Jeff Wu and Mike Hamada), 2021, John Wiley.

### Notes:

Thanks to the support of Texas A&M University Libraries, you can access the Wu-Hamada textbook for free:

http://proxy.library.tamu.edu/login? url=https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/toc/id:kpEPAOE002/experiments-planninganalysis?kpromoter=marc

This material Is: Recommended R

### Notes:

R statistical software package will be used for the example discussed in class, home assignments and examination. Please install the R software on your laptop from http://cran.r-project.org . You will use this software for homework assignments.

### This material Is: Optional

Design and Analysis of Experiments with R. (by Lawson, John), 2014. CRC press.

## Grading Policy

- Grades assigned are A for 90%-100%, B for 80%-89.9%, C for 70%79.9%, D for 60%-69.9% and F for less than 60%.

- Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days of the return of the graded material. No grade will be changed beyond the two business days limit.

- Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas.

- Grading components:

Homework - 10%

Exam 1 - 20% Exam 2 - 20% Final Exam - 30% Group Project - 20%

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Homework will be released on Canvas and is due on the designated. Late homework will be docked by 15% per every day it is late. No extensions will be made if the due date is your job interview day/exam day/holiday/etc. For homework before two exams (I will remind you which ones are those), no late homework will be accepted. If you would like to have your homework or exam re-graded, you have to do so within 10 days from the time when the homework/exam is returned to you.

Description of the project tasks will be announced on Canvas. Project report is due on the designated date. Late project report will be docked by 15% per every day it is late

## Course Schedule

## Course Contents/Topics

# 4. Factorial experiments at two levels, comparison with 'one-factor-at-atime' plans, analysis of location and dispersion, choice of optimal blocking schemes
# 5. Fractional factorial experiments at two levels, maximum resolution and minimum aberration for choosing optimal designs, choice of optimal blocking schemes
## 6. Orthogonal arrays
## 7. Introduction to fractional factorial experiments at three levels
## 8. Variation reduction, robust parameter design for product and process improvement
### Course Schedule
    - Week 1  Topic 1
    - Week 2  Topic 2
    - Weeks 4-5  Topic 3
    - Weeks 6-8  Topic 4
    - Week 9 Spring break
    - Weeks 10-11  Topic 5
    - Week 12  Topic 6
    - Week 13-14 Topic 7
    - Week 15 Topic 8
### EXAM SCHEDULE
Exam 1
: Friday February 13.
Exam 2
: Friday April 17.
Final Exam:
Thursday April 30.
Detailed arrangements regarding online exams will be announced separately.
#### AI Statement
According to the Texas A&M University Definitions of Academic Misconduct, plagiarism is the appropriation of another person's ideas, processes, results or words without giving appropriate credit ( aggiehonor.tamu.edu ). You should credit your use of anyone else's words, graphic images, or ideas using standard citation styles. AI text generators (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.) should not be used for any work for this class without explicit permission of the instructor and appropriate attribution. This includes, but is not limited to:
    - Creating or revising drafts
    - Editing your work
    - Reviewing a peer's work
This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.
Such use of AI text generators in this manner could be considered plagiarism and cheating according to Student Rule 20. More information may also be found at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu or you may contact your instructor if you have questions.
#### Technology Support
##### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
Hours: 24/7
Phone: (979) 845-8300
Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
##### Canvas LMS Technical Support
Hours: 24/7/365
Phone: (877) 354-4821
Email: support@instructure.com
Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
#### University Policies
This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
#### Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
#### University Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
#### Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
#### Notice of Nondiscrimination
Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
#### Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
#### Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
    - Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU
Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
    - Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
    - Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
    - Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
#### Pregnancy Accommodations
Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
#### Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
##### Texas A&M College Station
Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
#### Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
#### Free Speech and Civil Discourse
Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.

### 1. Basic principles and introduction to regression analysis

### 2. Experiments with a single factor, analysis of variance

### 3. Experiments with more than one factor, blocking, analysis of variance