# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

ISEN 689 Syllabus

Section 600 (66698) Special Topics in... Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 2:20PM

End Time: 3:35PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ETB 1013

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

<!-- image -->

Farzan Sasangohar

Email:

sasangohar@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4079

Phone:

979-458-2337

Office Hours

Tuesdays: 11-12 or by appointment

## Catalog Description

Special Topics in... Credit 1 to 4. Selected topics in an identified area of industrial engineering. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Approval of instructor.

<!-- image -->

## Additional Course Details

This course is a survey of emerging topics in healthcare human-systems engineering. The course uses the Design for X (DfX) methodology to discuss a wide range of contexts, technologies, and population-specific criteria (X's) that must be considered in designing a safe and usable healthcare ecosystem. Applications of Human Factors delves into critical and emergent issues in healthcare and patient safety, and how the field of human factors and ergonomics (HFE) plays a role in this domain. Typical design and operational problems in healthcare domains, along with their HFE solutions, will be highlighted. Students will apply HFE principles to design problems, and a research project will allow them to explore a relevant HFE topic in depth.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 330 or Approval of Instructor Approval of instructor.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- The students will be able to describe the role and scope of human factors/ergonomics in healthcare.

- The students will be able to apply human factors engineering methods to the analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation of healthcare systems.

- The students will be able to critically examine several emerging topics related to HF/E in healthcare and their implications and consequences for productivity, safety, wellness, and satisfaction in healthcare settings.

- The students will be able to exhibit effective teamwork and sharpen their communication skills.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

<!-- image -->

## Grading Policy

### Grade Determination:

#### 40% Research report (individual)

#### 30% Homework assignments (individual)

#### 20% Reflections (individual)

#### 10% Practicum (team)

Grades will be calculated on the basis of total points earned.  Grades may be curved based on class average, such that the point thresholds may be lowered from the following standard:

A: 90-100%  B: 80-89%  C: 70-79%  D: 60-69%  F: 59% and lower

Research Report

##### This material Is: Recommended

Design for Health: Applications of Human Factors

ISBN:

978-0128164273

Authors:

Sethumadhavan, A., Sasangohar, F.

Publisher:

Academic Press

Edition:

1st

Undergraduate students will conduct an original scoping or narrative review. Graduate students will work individually to conduct an original study and will generate a research paper on a topic relevant to the course, due near the end of the semester. A research report proposal will be due around the 3 rd week of class, so we can assess the relevance and depth of the topic and provide guidance. Further details on this report will be given early in the semester.

### Homework assignment:

There will be approximately three homework assignments, designed to give you practice in applying human factors methods learned in the course. Some but not all of the assignments may be graded (the instructor will specify when they are graded). Assignments will be posted on Canvas and announced in lecture and/or via email. Due dates for each exam will be provided when they are issued and will generally be within 1 week. Unless otherwise specified, completed assignments should be submitted on Canvas.

### Reflections:

Students will work on five assignments that reflect on the topic of the week and research healthcare applications of the concepts discussed.

### Practicum:

Students will work in teams of 3 to prepare and deliver a detailed case study on one of the course topics. The lecture should cover background research and an in-depth case study that illustrates the application of HF/E to their chosen topic.

### Re-grading Policy:

Students have 1 week after grades are released to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11-point font, single spacing) and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Reports that are submitted after the established deadline will not receive any credit.

## Course Schedule

Tentative Schedule

|    |
|----|

Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

0: Course Introduction

none

Week 1

Homework 0 Due 8/30

1: Introduction to HFE

in Healthcare

none

2: Medical Device Safety

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 1

Week 2

Reflection 1 Due 9/6

3: Medication Safety

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 2

Week 3

Project Proposal Due

9/13

4: Digital Health

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 3

HTA Packet on Canvas

Week 4

Reflection 2 Due 9/20

<!-- image -->

|    |
|----|

Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

5: Mobile Health

Technologies

Methods Lecture:

Hierarchical Task

Analysis

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 5

Week 5

Project Outline

Due

9/27

6: eHealth and

Telehealth

Methods Lecture: Digital

Prototyping using Figma

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 4

Week 6

Methods Lecture: Conducting Literature Reviews

Week 7

Homework 1 Due

10/11

7: Effective Care

Collaboration

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 6

8: Healthcare Systems:

Critical Care

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 7

Week 8

9: Healthcare Systems:

Emergencies

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 8

Week 9

Homework 2 Due

10/25

10: Resilience in

Healthcare

Methods Lecture:

Usability Testing and

Heuristic Evaluation

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 9

Usability Testing Packet on

Canvas

Week 10

Project Draft

Due 11/1

11: Collaborative Work

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 10

Week 11

Reflection 3 Due 11/8

|    |
|----|

Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

12: Healthcare

Workflows

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 13

Week 12

Reflection 5 Due 11/15

13: Other topics:

Interruptions, safety

culture/climate, systems

engineering methods,

special populations,

mental health

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 17

Week 13

Homework 3 Due

11/22

No class on 11/25 & 11/27 (Reading Day &

Thanksgiving)

Week 14

Project Paper Due on

11/24

Practicum Presentations

Week 15

Reviews Due on 12/3

## Additional Course Information

Course Material and Copyright

All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, "documents" means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, quizzes, exams, problem sets, slide sets, and all materials appearing on the class website or sent to you via email. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit enterprise.

## AI Statement

### Use of AI in the Course

According to the Texas A&M University Definitions of Academic Misconduct, plagiarism is the appropriation of another person's ideas, processes, results, or words without giving appropriate credit (aggiehonor.tamu.edu). You should credit your use of anyone else's words, graphic images, or ideas using standard citation styles. Artificial Intelligence (AI) text generators and natural language processing tools (colloquially, chatbots such as ChatGPT), audio, computer code, video, and image generators should not be used for any work for this class without the instructor's explicit permission and appropriate attribution. This includes, but is not limited to, i. Creating or revising drafts, ii. Editing your work, iii. Reviewing a peer's work. This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.

## Technology Support

### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus

Hours: 24/7

Phone: (979) 845-8300

Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu

Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help

### Canvas LMS Technical Support

Hours: 24/7/365

Phone: (877) 354-4821

Email: support@instructure.com

Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.

Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.

## University Policies

This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.

## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy

'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'

'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).

You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.

## University Attendance Policy

The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

## Makeup Work Policy

Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).

'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).

Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)

## Notice of Nondiscrimination

Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.

Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.

The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.

## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies

Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.

Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.

Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.

## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy

Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.

To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:

- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.

- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.

- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.

- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.

If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.

## Pregnancy Accommodations

Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.

Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.

## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness

Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.

### Texas A&M College Station

Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.

## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)

FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.

Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.

Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.

Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.

## Free Speech and Civil Discourse

Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.