# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 631 Syllabus

Section 700 (60220) Cognitive Systems Engineering Spring 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5

Preferred Contact Method

email

## Catalog Description

Cognitive Systems Engineering. (3-0). Credit 3. Analyze how artifacts, displays, social interaction and factors such as stress, time pressure, competing demands and uncertainty affect human cognitive functions such as perception, attention, memory, decision-making and problem-solving in joint human-machine systems; user-centered design techniques, research and evaluation methods introduced and applied to a design project. Prerequisites: ISEN 635, ISEN 430/ISEN 630, or approval of instructor.

<!-- image -->

## Additional Course Details

This course will provide an overview of the field of Cognitive Systems Engineering (CSE), which concerns how humans and technologies interact to perform cognitive work in sociotechnical systems. It will introduce underlying theory and methods in CSE that are applicable to the design of processes, tools, and technologies to support cognitive functions such as communication, planning, decision-making, and problem-solving in complex work domains. It will analyze how artifacts, displays, social interactions, and factors such as stress, time pressure, competing demands, and uncertainty affect performance of cognitive systems. Examples of current trends in CSE research will be discussed. Task analysis and human-centered design methods will be applied to a group project throughout the semester.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 635, ISEN 430/ISEN 630, or approval of instructor.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- demonstrate applied knowledge of sociotechnical systems engineering to define and analyze the interactions of humans and other system elements in real-world work systems

- demonstrate an understanding of historical foundations, as well as current hot topics and trends, in cognitive systems engineering research through review and discussion of published technical works

- demonstrate an understanding of human behavioral modes, and how errors emerge from system interactions

- demonstrate an understanding of system design strategies that champion principles of resilience engineering, for example, through error management techniques

- apply qualitative data collection and formal task analytical methodologies to collect human data and identify sources of system breakdowns, as well as propose theory-based potential system improvements

- demonstrate creativity and communication skills via a semester-long project with an in-class presentation

- demonstrate applied knowledge of course concepts in identifying humansystems interaction problems with an existing technology, and in proposing human-centered redesign solutions

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Optional

No Textbook Needed

## Grading Policy

### Grade determination

20% Reading responses and Discussion board

50% Exams: midterm (25%) and final exam (25%)

30% Semester project deliverables

Grades will be calculated according to total points earned. The points can be curved based on class average and may be lower than the following standard (out of a total of 100 percentage points).

A: 90-100% B: 80-89% C: 70-79% D: 60-69% F: 59% and lower

### Reading Responses:

With few exceptions, there will be an assigned reading related to the lecture material for each class. The readings will be posted on Canvas. As a way to jump-start class discussion, you will need to submit a reading response (RR) for each assigned reading via Canvas by 12:00 PM (noon) on the day BEFORE the associated lecture, unless otherwise specified. These responses must include header material (name, RR, date) and two clearly distinguished sections (I suggest using the following headers):

1. Discussion point(s), which should be at least one of the following:

# A. An insightful question about the reading. Time permitting, I will address as many of these questions as I can in lecture, and classmates will have a chance to respond as well.
## B. A comment about how the reading relates to other course concepts or to an example/anecdote from your own life experience.
# 1. Summary of the reading, in your own words (copying verbatim from the reading or other sources is considered plagiarism and will be treated according to the Academic Misconduct Policy). This summary is primarily meant to serve as a study aid (e.g., when reviewing for exams), and so should be organized in a way that best helps you. At a minimum, include the main messages of the reading as well as other relevant and/or interesting concepts discussed.
An RR template and grading rubric will be posted in Canvas. The lengths of  each  of  the  Discussion  points  and  Summary  sections  can  be  flexible,  but combined  should  be approximately  1  page  in  length . The  reading  response exercises are designed to support assimilation and retention of the course material, and also to identify  emphases for me to cover in lecture. We will also respond to each other's discussion points online, and continue discussions in lecture.
## Discussion Board:
As a means to jumpstart class discussion, the discussion points from the Reading Responses should be posted on Discussion Boards (DBs) in Canvas. In addition to posting  discussion  points/questions,  students  will  also  read  and  respond  to  your classmates' points/questions. The specific format for this activity is TBD (dependent on the course enrollment size) and will be communicated in the first week of class. DB responses will be assessed and associated with points in the 'Reading response and Discussion board' grade category.
## Exams
There  will  be  two  open-note,  take-home  written  exams:  a  midterm  which  is tentatively  scheduled  for  Week  8  (25%  of  final  grade),  and  a  comprehensive  final exam due on or before Finals Week (25% of final grade). Each exam will consist primarily of short answer and/or essay questions that emphasize application of the material discussed in lecture and assigned readings. Exam dates can be flexible in cases of need but must be communicated to Dr. Ferris prior to the exam's scheduled week.
## Semester Project :
Teams of students will collaborate on a project analyzing the cognitive work performed in a sociotechnical system of their choice. This project will take part in 3 phases, each with its own deliverables. Note that the 3-phase plan below is tentative and may change due to the availability of resources (any changes will be communicated in class and via announcements).
- Phase 0: Propose sociotechnical systems of interest for this project. Dr. Ferris will provide feedback and guide the selection.
- Deliverable: Project proposal (5% of project grade)
- Phase 1: Students will define/model the sociotechnical system and perform a front end analysis on that system. This will serve to inform the in situ data collection and guide the task analysis in Phase 2.
- Deliverable: Front end analysis report (25% of project grade)
- Phase 2: Students will apply observational and task analysis techniques to formally describe system tasks/functions that are critical to the main outputs of interest in the sociotechnical system. In addition to a task analysis description, the report deliverable will include identification of subtasks that are problematic or could likely be improved with different technologies, training, or procedures.
- Deliverable: Task analysis description and report (30% of project grade)
- Phase 3: Students will design a 'solution' to improve the effectiveness of the analyzed system according to shortcomings that were identified in Phase 2. This solution may take several forms, for example, it may involve the development of technology to aid humans in the system (e.g., software tool, external memory aid, information visualization), a procedural change, or a training method. An additional requirement may be for the solution to be evaluated using techniques discussed in class (e.g., usability study, focus groups/interviews/surveys, mini-experiments). Project groups will work with Dr. Ferris to determine the appropriate scope for this activity.
- Deliverables: Solution and evaluation report (30% of project grade), in-class presentation (10% of project grade)
Each team member is expected to contribute to each phase of the project and each deliverable. Students will be required to submit peer evaluation forms for the members of their team, and individual grades will be adjusted up/down based on the combined evaluation forms from all team members. Students are strongly encouraged to contact Dr. Ferris early on if there are any problems with/between team members that require attention.
## Re-grading Policy
Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and  must  clearly indicate the  relevant  problem(s)  and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.
## Late Work Policy
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
## Course Specific Late Work Policy
Dr. Ferris does not allow anything to be submitted late without a University-excused absence. Items that are submitted after the posted due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made in accordance with university rules (https://studentrules.tamu.edu/rule07/). In these cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.
## Course Schedule
Schedule of Topics
### Schedule of Topics
|    |
|----|
Week
Lecture Topic
Notes (RRs/DBs subject
to change)
Week 1
Jan 12, 14,
16
Course introduction
Human-centered design
Introduction to Cognitive
Systems Engineering
Bio
RR1/DB1: Woods & Roth,
1988
Week 2
Jan 19, 21,
23
Humans and sociotechnical
systems
Intro to analysis and design
methods
RR2/DB2: Wilson, 2013
RR3/DB3: Wickens et al.,
2004 (Ch. 3)
|    |
|----|
Week 3
Jan 26, 28,
30
Semester Project
Introduction
Cognitive Task Analysis
Case study: NICU incubator
design
RR4/DB4: Bisantz & Roth,
2007
RR5/DB5: Ferris & Shepley,
2013
Week 4
Feb 2, 4, 6
Human performance: Skill-
Rule-Knowledge Framework
Human error: models and
classification
RR6/DB6: Rasmussen,
1983
RR7/DB7: Reason, 1990
(Ch. 3)
Project proposal due
Week 5
Feb 9, 11, 13
Design-induced error and
error management
Resilience Engineering
RR8/DB8: Reason, 1990
(Ch. 7)
Week 6
Feb 16, 18,
20
Human-automation
interaction models and key
concepts
Trust in human-automation
systems
System breakdowns and
ironies of automation
RR9/DB9: Lee & See, 2004
RR10/DB10: Ferris et al.,
2010
Week 7
Feb 23, 25,
27
Bridging the Gulfs of
Execution and Evaluation
Display/interface principles
and usability
RR12/DB12: Norman, 1993
(Ch. 3)
RR13/DB13: Smith et al.,
2006
Project Phase 1
deliverable due
|    |
|----|
Week 8
March 2, 4, 6
Midterm review: Concept
mapping
Midterm Exam
Review the concept
mapping material
Week 9
SPRING BREAK - NO CLASS
Week 10
Mar 16, 18,
20
Ecological Interface Design
TBD/Slack
RR14/DB14: Vicente, 2002
Week 11
Mar 23, 25,
27
Directed attention and
dynamic fault management
Display/interface design to
support attention and task
management
RR15/DB15: Woods, 1995
RR16/DB16: Ferris & Sarter,
2011
Week 12
Mar 30, Apr
1, 3
Decision Making: models
and human tendencies
Decision Support Systems
RR17/DB17: Kahneman &
Klein, 2009
RR18/DB18: Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996
Project Phase 2
deliverable due
Week 13
Apr 6, 8, 10
Emotion and Stress factors
TBD/slack…
RR19/DB19: Lottridge et al.,
2011
Week 14
Apr 13, 15,
17
TBD/slack/Project
presentations
RR/DB: TBD
|    |
|----|
Week 15
Apr 20, 22,
24
… Apr 28
redefined day
Project presentations
Project Phase 3
deliverable due
May 4
Final exam due by 11:59 PM on Monday, 5/4/26
## Additional Course Information
### Re-grading Policy :
Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request via email to Dr. Ferris. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested regrade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.
## AI Statement
AI text generators (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.) should not be used for any work for this class without explicit permission of the instructor and appropriate attribution. This includes, but is not limited to:
- Editing your work
- Creating or revising drafts
- Reviewing a peer's work
This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.
Such use of AI text generators in this manner could be considered plagiarism and cheating according to Student Rule 20. More information may also be found at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu or you may contact your instructor if you have questions.
## Technology Support
Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
Hours: 24/7
Phone: (979) 845-8300
Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
### Canvas LMS Technical Support
Hours: 24/7/365
Phone: (877) 354-4821
Email: support@instructure.com
Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
## University Policies
This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
## University Attendance Policy
The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
## Makeup Work Policy
Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
## Notice of Nondiscrimination
Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M
does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
## Pregnancy Accommodations
Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
### Texas A&M College Station
Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
## Free Speech and Civil Discourse
Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.