# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

ISEN 625 Syllabus

Section 700 (48681) Simulation Methods and Applications Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times: This is an online class. There will be no regularly scheduled class meeting times. Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Amarnath Banerjee

Email:

banerjee@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4041 ETB

Phone:

979-458-2341

Office Hours

TBD

### Preferred Contact Method

All communication handled via email and announcements will be via email and/or Canvas

<!-- image -->

## Catalog Description

Simulation Methods and Applications. (2-3). Credit 3. Fundamental methodologies of simulation modeling; random number and variate generation, statistical analysis of model output, and discrete event modeling using a commercial simulation language. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.

## Additional Course Details

The catalog prerequisites are STAT 212 or STAT 601. A student should have passed STAT 601 or STAT 630 or ISEN 609 or (STAT 211 and STAT 212) or equivalent, AND have knowledge of computer programming.

It is essential that students have had a semester course in calculus-based probability and statistics covering at a minimum (1) distributions (single variable and joint probabilities) including the use of PDF's, PMF's and CDF's in obtaining probability statements and expectations and (2) statistics including confidence intervals and hypothesis testing.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

The catalog prerequisites are STAT 212 or STAT 601. A student should have passed STAT 601 or STAT 630 or ISEN 609 or (STAT 211 and STAT 212) or equivalent, AND have knowledge of computer programming.

It is essential that students have had a semester course in calculus-based probability and statistics covering at a minimum (1) distributions (single variable and joint probabilities) including the use of PDF's, PMF's and CDF's in obtaining probability statements and expectations and (2) statistics including confidence intervals and hypothesis testing.

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand the fundamental methodologies of discrete event (processoriented) simulation modeling,

- Understand the key statistical issues involved in simulation data preparation and the analysis of simulation output, and

- Become familiar with modeling using a commercial language (Simio).

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

### This material Is: Required

Simulation Modeling and Analysis, Sixth Edition

ISBN:

9781264268252

Authors:

Averill M. Law

Publisher:

McGraw Hill Professional

Publication Date:

2025-02-21

Notes:

5th Edition of the book will also work.

## Additional Instructional Materials

### This Material is: Optional

Simio and Simulation

Authors:

Jeffrey Smith, David Sturrock

Publisher:

Createspace Independent Publishing Platform

Edition:

7th Edition

URL for Resource:

https://textbook.simio.com/SASMAA7/

### Notes:

The book is available online.

## Grading Policy

### Grade Components

The four exams are worth a total of 80 points. There is no final exam for this course. The lab assignments are worth 12 points. Quizzes are worth 8 points.

- Exam 1 and Exam 2 are each worth 18 points. Lab Exam 1 and Lab Exam 2 are each worth 22 points.

- There will be 12 lab assignments. Each lab assignment will be worth 1 point. Submissions will not be accepted after the deadline.

- There will be regular quizzes during the semester. The weight of each quiz is dependent on the number of questions in the quiz. All the quizzes together will be worth 8 points. Quizzes must be taken during the availability time window.

### Grade Assignment

- Grades assigned are: A for 90% - 100%, B for 80% - 89.9%, C for 70% 79.9%, D for 60% - 69.9%, F for below 60%.

- Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days of the return of the graded material. No grade review request will be accepted beyond the two business days limit.

- Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Late work will not be accepted and will result in a zero grade unless there is a university excused absence.

## Course Schedule

|    |
|----|

Week Topics

Important

Events

1

Introduction to simulation and modeling;

relationship with probability and statistics, and

queueing theory.

Lab1: covering introduction to Simio, developing

basic queueing models

Lab 1 due

2

Introduction continued. Output Analysis

Lab 2: more Simio constructs, simulating a pull

(Kanban) system

Lab 2 due

3

Output Analysis: two different types of systems,

properties of output data

Lab3: counting, branching, custom run setup, plots,

interpreting results

Lab 3 due

4

Output Analysis: developing confidence intervals,

system comparison, non-terminating system

analysis

Lab4: system comparison, data tables, non-

stationary arrival process, branching

Lab 4 due

5

Output Analysis: non-terminating system analysis;

Input Analysis: Steps, options

Lab5: user defined statistics

Lab 5 due

6

Input Analysis: non-stationary arrival process, data

fitting

Lab6: introduction to processes

Lab 6 due, Exam

1

7

Input Analysis: Goodness of Fit tests

Lab Exam 1

### Weekly Topics

|    |
|----|

Week Topics

Important

Events

8

Random Numbers: importance, generation of

random numbers; tests for RNs

Lab7: Use of lists, reliability logic

Lab 7 due

9

Random Variates: different techniques for random

variate generation

Lab8: sequences, transporters, linking with data

tables

Lab 8 due

10

Random Variates continued; Monte Carlo

Simulation

Lab9: another assignment on sequences,

transporters, linking with data tables;

emphasis on separation of data from model, use of

relational tables

Lab 9 due

11

Verification and Validation

Lab10: non-stationary arrival process, work

schedule, function, use of processes

Lab 10 due

12

Simulation-Based Optimization; introduction to

Variance Reduction Technique

Lab11: simulation-based optimization using

OptQuest, ranking and selection using

KN method

Lab 11 due

13

Variance Reduction Techniques

Lab Exam 2

14

Task Sequences, introduction to Agent Based

Simulation

Lab 12: mixed model simulation - fluid flows

combined with discrete event

simulation, more use of Processes

Lab 12 due,

Exam 2

## Additional Course Information

### A Note About Homework

There will be homework assignments that will be assigned regularly. Homework will not be collected. It is in your interest to work on the homework problems and develop the solutions. The solutions will be posted for you to compare your work.

You can expect to see quiz questions and exam problems based on the homework problems.

### Course Material and Copyright Statement

All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, "documents" means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, quizzes, exams, problem sets, slide sets, and all materials appearing on the class web site or sent to you via email. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit or not-for-profit enterprise.

## AI Statement

According to the Texas A&M University Definitions of Academic Misconduct, plagiarism is the appropriation of another person's ideas, processes, results or words without giving appropriate credit (aggiehonor.tamu.edu). You should credit your use of anyone else's words, graphic images, or ideas using standard citation styles. AI text generators (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.) should not be used for any work for this class without explicit permission of the instructor and appropriate attribution. This

includes, but is not limited to:

- Creating or revising drafts

- Editing your work

- Reviewing a peer's work

This excludes pre-existing software additions such as spelling and grammar checkers, which are acceptable.

Such use of AI text generators in this manner could be considered plagiarism and cheating according to Student Rule 20. More information may also be found at https://aggiehonor.tamu.edu or you may contact your instructor if you have questions.

## Technology Support

Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus

Hours: 24/7

Phone: (979) 845-8300

Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu

Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help

### Canvas LMS Technical Support

Hours: 24/7/365

Phone: (877) 354-4821

Email: support@instructure.com

Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.

Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.

### Simio Software

The Industrial and Systems Engineering Department uses Simio, a fourth generation software system, under a grant from Simio LLC (https://www.simio.com). Although Simio is installed in the ISEN Cloud, I strongly recommend that you install a copy of the software on your PC. You will find the detailed instructions on Canvas. You will likely find this advantageous for working at home.

## Learning Resources

An updated list will be provided on Canvas during the semester.

## University Policies

This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.

## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy

'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'

'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).

You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.

## University Attendance Policy

The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

## Makeup Work Policy

Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).

'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).

Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)

## Notice of Nondiscrimination

Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.

Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.

The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.

## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies

Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.

Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.

Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.

## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy

Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.

To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:

- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.

- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.

- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.

- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.

If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.

## Pregnancy Accommodations

Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.

Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.

## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness

Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.

### Texas A&M College Station

Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.

## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)

FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.

Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.

Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.

Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.

## Free Speech and Civil Discourse

Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.