# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 641 Syllabus

Section 600 (59191) Systems Engineering Methods and Frameworks Spring 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: T

Start Time: 6:00PM

End Time: 8:30PM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 440

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Michael Graul

Email:

mgraul@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4017 and ZACH 403D

Phone:

979-575-7162

Office Hours

FRI and SUN 3-4p via zoom link: https://tamu.zoom.us/j/92077192436?

pwd=YPvt6NpI0rT9mSU9H5NdaCxEIty2ar.1

Preferred Contact Method

mgraul@tamu.edu

<!-- image -->

## Catalog Description

Systems Engineering Methods and Frameworks. (3-0). Credit 3. Concepts, methodology, methods and tools for discovery, definition, analysis, design, creation, and sustainment of systems involving information, physical, and human elements; architecture modeling methods include IDEF/UPDM; systems engineering frameworks include DoDAF/MoDAF, and Zachman; analysis tools include executable architectures to assess consistency, interoperability and performance. Prerequisites: MATH 304 or approval of instructor.

## Additional Course Details

course details

### From the instructor

This course is designed to provide the students with an understanding of the concepts, methodology, methods and tools of systems discovery, definition, analysis, design, creation, and sustainment. The main focus of the course is to develop the students' critical thinking skills to 1) define and analyze the as-is system, 2) develop and communicate the to-be system requirements, 3) transition these requirements into the design specification of a new or modified system, and 4) evaluate the value, correctness, interoperability, and performance of a system design. ISEN 640 is highly recommended as a prerequisite for this course

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): MATH 304 or approval of instructor.

## Course Learning Outcomes

The student will learn the component methods for systems architecting including: function modeling, process modeling, information and data modeling, ontology modeling and representation, software and system behavioral and structural design, systems dynamics modeling. The student will also learn the standard frameworks for structuring the systems development process and documenting the resulting artifacts. Finally the student will learn the core techniques for system architecture analysis including: requirements analysis, allocation, assessment, and design traceability, 2) design verification, validation, and completeness (VV&C), 3) cost / performance/risk tradeoff analysis, and 4) simulation based (Monte Carlo and Systems Dynamics) architecture performance assessment. In summary the learning objectives of this course include:

### 1. Mastery of component methods for system Architecting:

### a. Activity Modeling

### b. Process Modeling

### c. Information and Data Modeling

### d. Knowledge Modeling

### e. Factor Trees and Causal Loop Diagrams

### f. Solution Creation with DoDAF AV, CV, OV, DIV-1, SysML

### g. System Design with SysML, DoDAF SV, DIV-2/3

### Mastery of 'framework' of methods

# 2. for structuring the approach to systems development
## 3. Familiarization with basic architecting and analysis methods:
## a. Symptom collection and diagnosis
## b. Need condition formulation
## c. Requirement constraint formulation
## d. Requirements Analysis, Allocation, Assessment, and Traceability
## e. Analysis of Alternatives
## f. Verification, Validation, and Completeness (VV&C)
## g. Cost / Performance Based Trades
# h. Simulation based architecture evaluation and performance assessment
# 4. Familiarization with documentation for system development life cycle artifacts
## Special Course Designation
None
## Textbook and/or Resource Materials
### This material Is: Required
The student is required to acquire and study references called out in each module. Past lectures will be made available for review on-line
## Grading Policy
Grading policy grading policy
### Grading policy
Class attendance is required unless otherwise arranged with the instructor. Homework is due as stated on each Canvas managed assignment.  Class time will be used to discuss HW solutions.  Late homework may or may not be accepted at the sole discretion of the instructor, except as provided for in the Student Rules regarding Academics at http://studentrules.tamu.edu. Take home examinations are due at the time and date stated on the Canvas assignment. Late examination submissions are not accepted, except as provided for in the Student Rules regarding Academics at http://student-rules.tamu.edu. The material in this course is best learned through actual 'doing'. Systems Engineering is predominantly practiced a team environment.
Therefore the grades will be determined through student performance on homework assignments and in class participation as well as through examinations.
### 1. Homework (25%)
### 2. Class Participation + Quizzes 25%
### 3. Take home mid-term exam  25%
### 4. Final exam  25%
Optional assignments and test questions may be made available for extra credit.
#### Grading scale
#### Grading Scale
Grading will be on the Standard Letter Grading Scale:
A = 90-100
B = 80-89
C = 70-79
D = 60-69
F = &lt;60
## Late Work Policy
Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
## Course Schedule
This course will start with the study of component systems as simple or complex hybrids, involving information, computation, mechanical, and human elements. Later in the course we will study 'capabilities' that are formed as collections of interoperating systems - referred to in the current vernacular as a system of systems, or SOS. We will study the way engineered orchestration of the interoperability and combined performance of the collection will result in a desired capability. Throughout the course we will study methods, languages, and techniques that enable us to 'view' and analyze the as-is system, develop and communicate the to-be system requirements, and transition these requirements into the design specification of a new or modified system. The initial modeling methods focus will be the IDEF function, information, process, data, and ontology modeling methods.. Our study will be performed within the context of the systems development life cycle and the use of frameworks for applying the systems engineering discipline. The DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF) will be the primary structure studied. Other enterprise architectural frameworks such as MoDAF, FEAF, and the Zachman AF will be overviewed. The SysML/UML languages will be covered as they are a key component in these frameworks and the current basis for MBSE (Model Based Systems   Engineering). The primary analysis tools covered will be systems dynamics simulation. The foundational methods of factor trees and causal loop diagrams that support creation of systems dynamics simulation will be covered.
Topical outline schedule continuation
|    |
|----|
Week
Topic
Required Reading
1
Overview of System Engineering & Architectures
Methods
See Lecture Slides
2
Function Architecture Method
See Lecture Slides
3
Function Architecture Practice
See Lecture Slides
4
Information & Data Architecture History, Theory,
& Method
See Lecture Slides
|    |
|----|
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
### 5 Information Architecture Practice
### 6 Process Architecture Method
### 7 Process Architecture Practice
## 7 Mid Term Take Home Exam Distributed to Students
### 8 DoDAF Part I & SysML/UML Introduction
### 8 Mid Term Take Home Exam Response Due
### 9 DoDAF Part II & SysML/UML Basics
### 10 DoDAF Part II & SysML/UML Practice
### 11 SySML
### 12 SySML Practice
## 13 Ontology Architecture History, Theory, Method & Practice
### Systems dynamics emphasis
|    |
|----|
    # 14 Factor Trees, Causal Loops & Systems Dynamics Simulation
    ## 14 Systems Dynamics Practice and System Documentation
    ### 14      Final exam distributed to students
    ### Additional Course Information
    Required lecture reference readings are included in the lecture slides. Select prior year lectures, some reference materials/required readings, and this semesters lectures will be made available on Canvas. It is highly recommended that students avail themselves of this resource.
    ### AI Statement
    ISEN 641 is interesting in that the SE methods and frameworks discussed are used to represent knowledge and would likely fit under the symbolic view of AI (versus say the connectionist view of AI highlighted by heavy emphasis on data processing and pattern extraction).
    SE Methods produce models that embody the very knowledge that AI technologies seek to leverage (at least that's the hope through elements such as the RAG).
    If you can find AI apps that produce the models, using the methods, that we are covering in the course then by all means make it part of the class discussion.  If you have a question regarding the use of AI in this course then please ask.  I worked for Dr. Richard Mayer at KBSI for 30y (the developer of this course).  It's an AI company and he will be an observer in the course as well.  A major goal of the course is to produce models that represent knowledge that can used by AI applications.
    The bottom line is this - 641 is about the human use of SE methods and techniques to produce models that can be used both by humans and AI apps. Using AI apps to generate these models and their associated design rationale is not an objective of the course and any attempt to do so must be first cleared with the instructor.
    ### Technology Support
    #### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus
    Hours: 24/7
    Phone: (979) 845-8300
    Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu
    Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help
    #### Canvas LMS Technical Support
    Hours: 24/7/365
    Phone: (877) 354-4821
    Email: support@instructure.com
    Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.
    Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.
    We will leverage a wide array of tool support from the TAMU VMWare server.  You should be able to connect to the Engineering desktop using your TAMU logon.  If connecting from off-campus you may need to use a VPN in order for the TAMU system to recognize your credentials correctly.
    ### University Policies
    This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.
    ### Academic Integrity Statement and Policy
    'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'
    'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).
    You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.
    ### University Attendance Policy
    The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.
    Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
    ### Makeup Work Policy
    Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.
    Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.
    Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).
    'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.2).
    Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)
    ### Notice of Nondiscrimination
    Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.
    Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.
    The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.
    ### Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies
    Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.
    Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.
    Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.
    ### Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy
    Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.
    To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:
    - Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU
    Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.
    - Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.
    - Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.
    - Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.
    If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.
    ### Pregnancy Accommodations
    Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.
    Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.
    ### Statement on Mental Health and Wellness
    Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.
    #### Texas A&M College Station
    Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.
    ### Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
    FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.
    Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.
    Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.
    Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.
    ### Free Speech and Civil Discourse
    Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides