# College of Engineering

## Industrial and Systems Engineering

## ISEN 609 Syllabus

Section 600 (54141) Probability for Engineering Decisions Fall 2026 - College Station

## Course Information

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: R

Start Time: 5:30PM

End Time: 8:30PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 211

Credit Hours:

3

## Instructor Details

Petar Momcilovic

Email:

petar@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4043

Phone:

979 458 2374

Office Hours

TBD

<!-- image -->

## Catalog Description

Probability for Engineering Decisions. (3-0). Credit 3. Introduction to probability and stochastic processes for characterization of uncertainty in engineering decisions. Prerequisite: Approval of instructor.

## Course Prerequisites

Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): Approval of instructor.

An undergraduate course in probability for background material. Excellent skills in algebra, calculus and probability. Willing to use software (Python, R, Matlab).

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Use tools and techniques from probability theory to characterize uncertainty in engineering decisions

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

### This material Is: Required

Introduction to Probability Models

ISBN:

9780080467825

Authors:

Sheldon M. Ross

Publisher:

Elsevier

Publication Date:

2006-11-21

### This material Is: Optional

Introduction to Stochastic Processes with R

ISBN:

9781118740729

Authors:

Robert P. Dobrow

Publisher:

John Wiley & Sons

Publication Date:

2016-04-06

### This material Is: Optional

Modeling and Analysis of Stochastic Systems

Authors:

V. Kulkarni

### This material Is: Optional

Introduction to Probability

ISBN:

9781886529236

Authors:

Dimitri Bertsekas, John N. Tsitsiklis

Publisher:

Athena Scientific

Publication Date:

2008-07-01

Notes:

undergraduate material

<!-- image -->

## Grading Policy

- Grading Scale: A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69%, F = &lt;60%.

- Weights: Assignments 20%, First exam 40%, Second exam 40%, Homework 0%.

- Assignments: no make-ups; take-home, open notes/book.

- First exam: in-class, closed-notes on October 22, 2026

- Second exam: non-cumulative, in-class, closed-notes on December 3, 2026

- Homework: Not collected; solutions will be given. Spend time solving the homework problems. Do not peek into the solutions too early. The homework problems have a programming component; implementing analytical concepts in software is crucial for their understanding.

- Grading appeals: Every effort will be made to ensure that grading is as objective and fair as possible. If you believe that there is an error in the grading, please submit, in writing, an appeal within one week of your work being returned. However, please be advised that if you submit such an appeal, the entire assignment/exam will be regraded to ensure that all parts are properly graded. As such, your grade on the exam could increase or decrease based on the secondary grading.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Work submitted after a deadline is considered late and will not be accepted.

### This material Is: Optional

A First Course in Probability

ISBN:

9781292024929

Authors:

Sheldon Ross

Publication Date:

2013-07-31

Notes:

undergraduate material

## Course Schedule

|    |
|----|

Week

Topics

1-3

Review of basic probability (probability spaces and axioms;

conditional probability and dependence; law of total

probability and Beyes rule; random variables, distributions

and expectation operator; multivariate distributions;

computation of expectations; linearity of expectation)

4-7

Discrete-time Markov chains (modeling, transient analysis

and classification of states, steady-state analysis, balance

equations, Monte Carlo Markov chain)

9

First exam (October 22, 2026)

7, 8, 10

Dynamic programming (finite-horizon problems, infinite-

horizon discounted problems, value iteration and synthesis

of optimal policy, policy iteration)

11-13

Continuous-time Markov chains (exponential distribution,

modeling, Poisson process and its properties, transient

analysis and classification of states, steady-state analysis,

embedded chain)

15

Second exam (December 3, 2026)

## AI Statement

With the emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies, the ways in which we define our creative processes continue to transform. AI generators are rapidly evolving from simple editing for grammatical errors and spelling mistakes (Grammarly, MS Word Spell Check) to sophisticated text production (ChatGPT, Google Bard, etc.), as well as image, computer code, and audio generation. The presence of such tools, however, does not replace our need to learn how to draft, revise, and reflect on texts, programs, drawings and how to exercise information literacy and personal responsibility in how we locate, evaluate, incorporate, and cite primary/ secondary sources. For example, the

### Course Schedule

Association for Writing Across the Curriculum states the following: Writing to learn is an intellectual activity that is crucial to the cognitive and social development of learners and writers. This vital activity cannot be replaced by AI language generators (AWAC).

Engaging in the various aspects of creative pursuits (e.g., writing, coding, drawing) is critical to education in a broad sense. While AI technologies will continue shaping how we approach these creative tasks, the critical work of creativity relies on integrity, originality, and ethical conduct in regard to appropriate representation as an author or creator. Thus, submitting work with a significant percentage of AI-generated content, unless otherwise permitted, can be considered academic misconduct under Texas A&M University Student Rule 20. Students must therefore cite the use of Generative AI tools and document what they have contributed to an assignment.

## Technology Support

### Technology Services (IT) - Main Campus

Hours: 24/7

Phone: (979) 845-8300

Email: helpdesk@tamu.edu

Call/Chat/Email/visit: https://it.tamu.edu/help

### Canvas LMS Technical Support

Hours: 24/7/365

Phone: (877) 354-4821

Email: support@instructure.com

Support is available by clicking the Help button at the far left in the Canvas global navigation menu.

Canvas Resources are also linked on the home page of every Canvas course.

## University Policies

This section outlines the university-level policies that must be included in each course syllabus. The TAMU Faculty Advisory Council established the wording of these policies.

## Academic Integrity Statement and Policy

'An Aggie does not lie, cheat or steal, or tolerate those who do.'

'Texas A&M University students are responsible for authenticating all work submitted to an instructor. If asked, students must be able to produce proof that the item submitted is indeed the work of that student. Students must keep appropriate records at all times. The inability to authenticate one's work, should the instructor request it, may be sufficient grounds to initiate an academic misconduct case' (Section 20.1.2.3, Student Rule 20).

You can learn more about the Aggie Honor System Office Rules and Procedures, academic integrity, and your rights and responsibilities at aggiehonor.tamu.edu.

## University Attendance Policy

The university views class attendance and participation as an individual student responsibility. Students are expected to attend class and to complete all assignments.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about excused absences, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

## Makeup Work Policy

Students will be excused from attending class on the day of a graded activity or when attendance contributes to a student's grade, for the reasons stated in Student Rule 7, or other reason deemed appropriate by the instructor.

Please refer to Student Rule 7 in its entirety for information about makeup work, including definitions, and related documentation and timelines.

Absences related to Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 may necessitate a period of more than 30 days for make-up work, and the timeframe for make-up work should be agreed upon by the student and instructor' (Student Rule 7, Section 7.4.1).

'The instructor is under no obligation to provide an opportunity for the student to make up work missed because of an unexcused absence' (Student Rule 7,

### [Section 7.4.2).](https://student-rules.tamu.edu/rule07/)

Students who request an excused absence are expected to uphold the Aggie Honor Code and Student Conduct Code. (See Student Rule 24.)

## Notice of Nondiscrimination

Texas A&M University is committed to providing safe and non-discriminatory learning, living, and work environments for all members of the University community. The University provides equal opportunity to all employees, students, applicants for employment or admission, and the public, regardless of race, color, sex (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, or veteran status.

Texas A&M University will promptly, thoroughly, and fairly investigate and resolve all complaints of discrimination, harassment (including sexual harassment), complicity, and related retaliation based on a protected class in accordance with System Regulation 08.01.01, University Rule 08.01.01.M1, Standard Administrative Procedure (SAP) 08.01.01.M1.01, and applicable federal and state laws. In accordance with Title IX and its implementing regulations, Texas A&M does not discriminate on the basis of sex in any educational program or activity, including admissions and employment.

The following person has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints regarding the non-discrimination policies: Jennifer M. Smith, TAMU Associate VP & Title IX Coordinator at YMCA Ste 108, College Station, TX 77843, 979-458-8407, or email civilrights@tamu.edu. For other reporting options, visit the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights Complaint Assessment System to locate the address and phone number of the office that serves your area, or call 1-800-421-3481.

## Civil Rights, Free Speech, and Title IX Policies

Texas A&M University is committed to fostering a learning environment that is safe and productive for all. University policies and federal and state laws prohibit discrimination and harassment based on an individual's race, color, sex, (including pregnancy and related conditions), religion, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, veteran status, or any other legally protected characteristic. This includes forms of sex-based violence, such as sexual assault, sexual harassment, sexual exploitation, dating/domestic violence, and stalking.

Students can report discrimination/harassment, access supportive resources, or learn more about their options for resolving complaints on the University's Civil Rights & Title IX webpage.

Students should be aware that all university employees (except medical or mental health providers) are mandatory reporters, which means that if they observe, experience or become aware of an incident that they reasonably believe to be discrimination/harassment alleged to have been committed by or against a person who was a student or employee at the time of the incident, the employee must report the incident to the university.

## Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy

Texas A&M University is committed to providing equitable access to learning opportunities for all students. If you experience barriers to your education due to a disability or think you may have a disability, please contact the Disability Resources office on your campus (resources listed below). Disabilities may include, but are not limited to, attentional, learning, mental health, sensory, physical, or chronic health conditions. All students are encouraged to discuss their disability-related needs with Disability Resources and their instructors as soon as possible.

To request academic accommodations, contact the designated ADA office based on your location:

- Texas A&M University, College of Nursing, College of Dentistry, Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy College Station, College of Medicine, School of Public Health, Institute of Biosciences and Technology, EnMed Program, Bush School in Washington DC, Mays Business School - CityCentre, TAMU Engineering Academies, Texas A&M University Higher Education Center at McAllen and Texas A&M University at Galveston should contact Disability Resources at (979) 845-1637 or disability@tamu.edu.

- Texas A&M University School of Law should contact the Office of Student Affairs at (817) 212-4111 or law-disability@law.tamu.edu to request accommodations.

- Irma Lerma Rangel College of Pharmacy in Kingsville should contact the Disability Resource Center at Texas A&M University-Kingsville at (361) 5933024 or drc.center@tamuk.edu to request accommodations.

- Texas A&M University College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences in Canyon should contact the Office of Student Accessibility at West Texas A&M University - Canyon at (806) 651-2335 or osa@wtamu.edu.

If you are experiencing difficulties with your approved accommodations, contact the office responsible for approving your accommodations or the Texas A&M ADA Coordinator Julie Kuder at ADA.Coordinator@tamu.edu or (979) 458-8407.

## Pregnancy Accommodations

Texas A&M provides reasonable accommodations to students due to pregnancy and/or related conditions, such as childbirth, recovery, and lactation. Students should contact the University's Pregnancy Coordinator as soon as they become aware of the need for accommodation. Depending on the circumstances, accommodations could include extended time to complete assignments or exams, changes in course sequence, or modifications to the physical classroom environment.

Texas A&M will also allow a voluntary leave of absence, ensure the availability of lactation space, and maintain grievance procedures to provide for the prompt and equitable resolution of complaints of sex discrimination. For information regarding pregnancy accommodations, email TIX.Pregnancy@tamu.edu.

## Statement on Mental Health and Wellness

Texas A&M University recognizes that mental health and wellness are critical factors influencing a student's academic success and overall wellbeing. Students are encouraged to engage in healthy self-care practices by utilizing the resources and services available through University Health Services. The TELUS Health Student Support app provides access to professional counseling in multiple languages anytime, anywhere by phone or chat, and the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline offers 24-hour emergency support at 988 or 988lifeline.org.

Texas A&M College Station Students needing a listening ear can contact University Health Services at 979.458.4584. Call 911 or visit your nearest emergency room if you are currently experiencing a life-threatening situation or if your safety is at risk. 24-hour emergency help is also available through the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (988) or at 988lifeline.org.

## Statement on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)

FERPA is a federal law designed to protect the privacy of educational records by limiting access to these records, to establish the right of students to inspect and review their educational records, and to provide guidelines for the correction of inaccurate and misleading data through informal and formal hearings.

Currently enrolled students wishing to withhold any or all directory information items can do so within howdy.tamu.edu using the Directory Information Withholding Form. The complete FERPA Notice to Students and the student records policy is available on the Office of the Registrar webpage.

Items that can never be identified as public information are a student's social security number, citizenship, gender, grades, GPR, or class schedule. All efforts will be made in this class to protect your privacy and to ensure confidential treatment of information associated with or generated by your participation in the class.

Directory items include name, UIN, local address, permanent address, email address, local telephone number, permanent telephone number, dates of attendance, program of study (college, major, campus), classification, previous institutions attended, degrees, honors and awards received, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, medical residence location, and medical residence specialization.

## Free Speech and Civil Discourse

Texas A&M recognizes that the pursuit of truth through open and robust discourse is critical to academic inquiry. However, as a community of scholars, the university has an aspirational expectation that such discourse will be conducted in accordance with Aggie Core Values. In this 'marketplace of ideas,' we encourage civil dialogue creating an environment that allows individuals to express their ideas and to have their ideas challenged in respectful and responsible ways. Students can learn more about Freedom of Expression and Free Speech on the University's website about the First Amendment.