## ISEN 691 Syllabus


Section 607 (22622) Research Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Through coordinated meetings each week in the HF&CS lab, the student will work alongside and with the guidance of lab members and Dr. Ferris to advance the goals of a research project. Weekly check-in meetings will serve to guide the next steps of the project internally. Participation in larger project meetings (i.e., with collaborators across multiple TAMU departments, held at separate times most weeks) will also connect the student's experience to those of interdisciplinary collaborators. Depending on the credits associated with this effort, the student will lead efforts to collect and review literature, design experimental protocol, seek IRB approval, conduct a human-subjects study, compile and analyze results, and/or contribute to the writing of technical report of the findings, in collaboration with Dr. Ferris and other HF&CS lab members.

Credit Hours:

1 TO 23


## Instructor Details


Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5


## Catalog Description


Research. Credit 1 or more each semester. Research in industrial engineering field; content and credit dependent upon needs of individual student.




## Additional Course Details


This research study will follow an ongoing project in the Human Factors & Cognitive Systems (HF&CS) Lab. Ideally the research efforts will play out over multiple semesters, ultimately concluding in (or including) a full human subjects data collection. After data collection is complete, the student will lead the efforts in analyzing the data and writing a final research report, for submission to peerreviewed journal outlets (to be determined in consultation with Dr. Ferris and HF&CS members).


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Complete the processes of achieving IRB approval and conducting human subjects study

- Analyze collected data and produce results for statistical testing

- Acquire a deeper understanding of the mechanisms involved in human perception

- Develop a procedure for reliably inducing human performance effects, based on analyzed results

- Communicate technical results through periodic lab presentations and the submission of research for peer-reviewed publication


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Optional

No Text Required


## Grading Policy

### Grading Policy


Midterm deliverable

: 30% of grade

Final deliverable:

50% of grade

Weekly meeting attendance and updates:

20% of grade


### Grading Scale


A = 90-100%

B = 80-89%

C = 70-79%

D = 60-69%

F = &lt;60%


### Expected Outcomes/Deliverables


The grade for this course will be determined by the following deliverables:

1. Midterm deliverable (due Week 8): Presentation to HF&CS lab on initial progress of data collection with analysis
2. Final Deliverable (due Finals Week): Final report with progress of entire project
3. Attend weekly meetings with the HF&CS lab team and the larger Rubberhand project team, give regular updates on progress in conducting the human subjects study, and analyzing/reporting its results.

## Grading Appeals:

Every effort will be made to ensure that grading is as objective and fair as possible. If you believe that there is an error in the grading, please submit, in writing, an appeal within one week of your work being returned. However, please be advised that if you submit such an appeal, the entire assignment/exam will be regraded to ensure that all parts are properly graded. As such, your grade on the exam could increase or decrease based on the secondary grading.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Schedule

### schedule of topics


Week
Tasks
1
(Assuming IRB approval) send out and plan recruitment for
new study/ Recruit members for data collection
2-3
Conduct testing
4-5
Continue testing
6
Start analysis while testing wraps up
7 - 10
Analysis finalization, presentation of Midterm results
11
Finalize results and perform statistical analyses
12
Prepare initial draft of journal article, outlining Introduction,
Methods, Results, and Discussion material
13-15
Iteratively refine and revise final report/ help other studies
to prepare for a summer data collection with collaborators