## Course Information


Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5

Preferred Contact Method

email


## Catalog Description


Human Operator in Complex Systems. (3-0). Credit 3. Basic understanding of the theory and practice of human factors engineering; topics presented within the framework of humans as functioning systems and their requirements when incorporated in hardware and software systems.




## Additional Course Details


This graduate course is an overview of the discipline of human factors engineering, covering  topics  of  human  cognition  (perception,  attention,  information  processing), and human physical properties (anthropometry, physiology, biomechanical capabilities,  and  injury  risk),  and  emphasizing  the  implications  for  the  design  of human-centered work systems. Theory and methods will be balanced with examples drawn  from  familiar  work  domains,  including  manufacturing,  medicine,  aerospace, ground transportation, and computer interaction. Students will apply course principles to design problems and a semester-long research project will allow them to explore a relevant human factors engineering topic of interest.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- demonstrate an understanding of the unique factors effecting human performance in sociotechnical systems,

- apply human factors theory to the design or selection of system elements to support human performance and safety,

- apply theory to calculate the severity of hazards due to exposure to visual, auditory, vibratory, and other environmental stimuli and identify redesign solutions for mitigating the hazards,

- apply theory to determine ideal display, control, and physical layout characteristics for supporting an operator's cognitive and physical performance,

- demonstrate communication skills in a semester-long writing assignment, and

- demonstrate applied knowledge of course concepts in identifying humansystems interaction problems with an existing technology, and in proposing redesign solutions.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Recommended

Designing for People: An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering, Third Edition.

Authors: Lee, J.D., Wickens, C.D., Liu, Y., & Ng Boyle, L.


## Grading Policy

### Grade determination


40% Assignments (homework and online quizzes)

50% Exams: midterm (25%) and final exam (25%)

10% Research report

Grades will be calculated according to total points earned. The points can be curved based on class average and may be lower than the following standard (out of a total of 100 percentage points).

A: 90-100% B: 80-89% C: 70-79% D: 60-69% F: 59% and lower


### Assignments


There will be approximately one Assignment (homework or quiz) released per lecture topic. These are designed to give you practice in applying methods, principles, and ideas  learned  in  the  course.  Some  but  not  all  of  the  assignments  will  be  graded. Generally,  assignments  will  be  posted  at  the  beginning  of  each  week  (Monday  or Tuesday), after that week's lecture material has been posted. All assignments will be completed  and/or  submitted  via  Canvas.  Due  dates  for  each  assignment  will  be given  when  they  are  issued,  but  typically  and  will  be  due  1  week  after  they  are posted. Unless otherwise specified, students are encouraged to work together with classmates as you complete written homework assignments (not quizzes), but every person must turn in an assignment with work shown clearly for each problem. The total  homework/quiz  grade  will  be  based  on  total  points,  not  on  the  average  of percentage grades for each entry, and this total points score will contribute to 40% of the final grade for this course.

Generally, homework and quizzes that are submitted after the due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made at the discretion of the instructor, in accordance  with  university-excused  absence  rules.  In all of  these  cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.


### Exams


There will be two exams, each worth 25% of the overall course grade. Each exam will  be  hosted  in  Canvas,  and  you  will  be  asked  to  Zoom-record  yourselves  while taking the exam (Dr. Ferris will walk through the process of doing this if you haven't done it before). The exams will be timed (75 minutes apiece) and both will be open book, open note, open internet, but must be completed individually. The exams will be made available over a period of several days and can be taken at the time that is most convenient for  you.  Collaboration  on  exams  with  any  other  human  is  strictly forbidden and is considered a serious honor code violation (see Academic Integrity and Misconduct Policy section below for ISEN-mandated consequences).

The format for each exam will primarily be multiple choice, true/false, or short answer, and will include a small number of problems that will require written work, which should be scanned and submitted via Canvas separately upon completing the timed exam. The exams will emphasize material discussed in lecture and practiced in  the  homework; material exclusively in the text will  not  be  tested  but  may  aid  in providing background information.

Exam dates will be flexible only in case of sickness, military service, jury duty, presentation  at  a  professional  conference,  or  death  in  the  family  (documentation required in all cases).


### Research report


Each student will work individually to prepare an in-depth research paper on some topic relevant to the course, due a few weeks before the end of the semester (dates

TBD). A proposal for this paper will be due around the 3 rd week of class, so that I can judge  the  relevance  and  depth  of  the  topic  and  provide  advice/guidance.  Your completed report will be critically reviewed by other students (peer-reviews), and you will similarly review others' reports. The Research report and related review work is worth 10% of the overall grade, and the quality of your report as well as reviews will be assessed. Further details on this report will be given early in the semester.


### Re-grading Policy


Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and  must  clearly indicate the  relevant  problem(s)  and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Dr. Ferris does not allow anything to be submitted late without a University-excused absence. Items that are submitted after the posted due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made in accordance with university rules (https://studentrules.tamu.edu/rule07/). In these cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.


## Course Schedule

### Schedule of Topics

#### Schedule of Topics




Topic

Lessons

Text/source

material and

references

Approximate

Week

0: Course

Introduction

0.1 Course intro

0.2 Course highlights

None

Week 1

1: Introduction

to HFE

1.1 Definitions and

history

1.2 General guidelines

for design and

practice

1.3 Intro to HFE

methods

1.4 Case study

Chapter 1, 2, 3

Canvas:

Military

Standards

2: Vision

2.1 Basics of sight and

eye anatomy

2.2 The retina, rods

and cones, light

adaptation

2.3 Refraction and

visual correction

2.4 Visual acuity, limits

of detection and

identification

2.5 Contrast and

readable text

2.6 Color vision and

color-anomalous

vision

2.7 Size and depth

cues

Chapter 4

Week 2



3: Illumination

in the

workplace

3.1 Basic photometry

3.2 Calculating

illuminance and

Lambert's Law

3.3 Luminance and

reflectance

3.4 Design for proper

illumination

Chapter 4

Week 3

4: Displays

4.1 Types of displays

4.2 Criteria and design

principles for

effective display

4.3 Color coding and

the psychology of

color

4.4 Graphical icons

4.5 Advanced displays

4.6 Naturally-mapping

representations

Chapter 8

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.2

5: Controls and

Dynamics

5.1 Case study

5.2 Basic control types

5.3 Design of controls

5.4 Control mapping

and compatibility

Chapter 9

SAE Standard

J1139

Week 4

6:

Documentation

and Warnings

6.1 Written information

processing

6.2 Design for

readability

6.3 Changing behavior

with warnings

6.4 Warning design

Chapter 8

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.4

7: Hearing and

Noise

7.1 Basics of hearing

and ear anatomy

7.2 Measuring sound

7.3 Sound perception

7.4 Sound localization

7.5 Auditory displays

7.6 Hearing loss and

noise control

Chapter 5

Week 5





8: Supporting

Cognitive

Functions

8.1 Attention basics,

design for attention

8.2 Memory, design for

memory

8.3 Case study

8.4 Cognitive workload

8.5 Multitasking

8.6 Stress effects,

design to

remediate stress

Chapters 6

and 7

Week 6

9: Human Error

9.1 Reason's model of

human error

9.2 Design-induced

error

9.3 Case study

9.4 Violations

9.5 Error management

and design for error

Canvas

Human Error

package

Week 7

10: Motor

Skills &

Control

10.1 Classification of

motor movements

10.2 Tracking and

control loops

10.3 Predictive models

of response time

10.4 Reaction time:

information content

and Hick-Hyman

Law

10.5 Movement time:

Fitts' Law

10.6 Descriptive

models of

response time

Chapter 9

Week 8

Midterm exam on Topics 1 - 9 to be taken at end of Week 8





11:

Anthropometry

11.1 Human

dimensional

variability

11.2 Anthropometric

design

11.3 Statistical and

heuristic

anthropometric

calculations

Chapter 12

Canvas

Anthropometry

package

Week 9

12: Workspace

Design

12.1 Physical

considerations

12.2 Visual and

cognitive

considerations

13: Work

Physiology

13.1 Muscle function

and metabolic

cycle

13.2 Respiratory and

circulatory

systems

13.3 Physical workload

measurement

Chapter 14

Week 10

14:

Biomechanics

14.1 Manual material

handling and

occupational

biomechanics

14.2 Static planar

biomechanical

models

14.3 Lifting

assessment

methods

14.4 NIOSH lifting

equation

Chapter 13

Week 11

15:

Environmental

Stressors

15.1 Motion stressors

15.2 Air quality

stressors and

ventilation

15.3 Thermal stressors

Chapter 15

MIL-STD-

1472G section

5.5

Week 12





16: Cumulative

Trauma

Disorders

16.1 CTD definitions,

statistics, and risk

factors

16.2 CTDs of the

fingers

16.3 CTDs of the hand

and wrist

16.4 CTDs of the

elbow and shoulder

16.5 CTDs of the neck

and back

16.6 Tool selection and

ergonomic design

to reduce CTD risk

Chapter 13

Week 13

TBD

Slack to catch up with

remaining topics

and/or special topics!!

Week 14

Final exam focusing on Topics 10 - 16: Taken on or before the TAMU- assigned date


## Additional Course Information

### Re-grading Policy :


Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request via email to Dr. Ferris. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested regrade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.
