## ISEN 625 Syllabus


Section 600 (55586) Simulation Methods and Applications Spring 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 09:35AM

End Time: 10:25AM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LAB

Meeting Days: M

Start Time: 1:50PM

End Time: 4:20PM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ETB 2026

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


David Eckman

Email:

eckman@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4014

Phone:

979-458-2380

Office Hours

TBD




## Catalog Description


Simulation Methods and Applications. (2-3). Credit 3. Fundamental methodologies of simulation modeling; random number and variate generation, statistical analysis of model output, and discrete event modeling using a commercial simulation language. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand the fundamental methodologies of discrete event (processoriented) simulation modeling.

- Understand the key statistical issues involved in simulation data preparation and the analysis of simulation output.

- Become familiar with modeling using both a general-purpose language (Python) and a commercial language (Simio).


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Recommended

Foundations and Methods of Stochastic Simulation: A First Course

Authors:

Barry L. Nelson and Linda Pei

URL for Resource:

https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/tamucs/detail.action?docID=1082095

This material Is: Recommended

Simulation Modeling and Analysis

ISBN:

978-0-07-340132-4

Authors:

Averill M. Law

This material Is: Recommended

Simio and Simulation: Modeling, Analysis, Applications

Authors:

Jeffrey S. Smith and David T. Sturrock

URL for Resource:

https://textbook.simio.com/SASMAA7/

This material Is: Recommended

Discrete-Event Simulation

ISBN:

978-0136062127

Authors:

Jerry Banks, John S. Carson II, Barry L. Nelson, and David M. Nicol

Edition:

5th


## Grading Policy


Grades will be based on attendance, participation, lab assignments, quizzes, a midterm exam, and a final exam:

- Attendance 4%

- Participation 6%

- Homework: 0%

- Lab Assignments: 10%

- Quizzes: 10%

- Midterm Exam: 35%

- Final Exam: 35%

Attendance: Attendance will be taken during each lecture and is worth 4% of the final grade. You will receive 4% if you attend at least four-fifths of the lectures, 3% if you attend between three-fifths and four-fifths of the lectures, 2% if you attend between two-fifths and three-fifths of the lectures, 1% if you attend between onefifth and two-fifths of the lectures, and 0% if you attend fewer than one-fifth of the lectures. Excluding exam dates, there are expected to be about 28-29 lectures in the term.

Participation: Your participation in these lectures will be worth 6% of the final grade. You will receive 1% every time you ask/answer a question, up to 6 times throughout the semester. In any given class session, you can earn up to a maximum of 1%, i.e., asking/answering more than one question in a lecture will only count as one point of participation.

Homework: There will be (roughly) bi-weekly homework assignments. Assignments and solutions will be posted as Jupyter notebooks on Canvas. Homework will not be collected or graded.

Lab Assignments: There will be exercises to be completed during the weekly labs. These will be graded for completion, not correctness. You will receive 1 point for each completed lab exercise up to a maximum of 10 points, i.e., you are expected to complete 10 of the lab exercises.

Quizzes: There will also be short quizzes given during the weekly labs. These will be graded for correctness. Your 10 highest quiz scores will be counted.

Midterm and Final Exam: The midterm and final exams will consist of freeresponse questions testing critical thinking and quantitative reasoning. The midterm exam is scheduled for Monday, March 16 from 1:50-3:50pm in ETB 2026. The final exam is scheduled for Thursday, April 30 from 12:30pm-2:30pm in ZACH 345. If you are unable to take the exams at the scheduled times for a valid reason (e.g., serious illness or family emergency), you must inform me as soon as possible and provide proof.

Grades: Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas. Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within five business days of the return of the graded material. No grade review request will be accepted beyond this period.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Schedule


Tentative schedule.



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

1

M

Jan

12

Lab 1

Simulation by hand

1

T

Jan

13

Lecture

1

Syllabus and introduction to simulation

1

R

Jan

15

Lecture

2

Basics of discrete-event simulation

2

M

Jan

19

-

NO CLASS: MLK DAY

2

T

Jan

20

Lecture

3

Review of probability and statistics

Instructor

travel

2

R

Jan

22

Lecture

4

Review of probability and statistics

Instructor

travel

3

M

Jan

26

Lab 2

Introduction to simulation in Python

3

T

Jan

27

Lecture

5

Conceptual modeling

3

R

Jan

29

Lecture

6

Input analysis - input modeling, no data

4

M

Feb 2

Lab 3

Introduction to simulation in Simio

4

T

Feb 3

Lecture

7

Input analysis - histograms and kernel density

estimation

4

R

Feb 5

Lecture

8

Input analysis - empirical data and resampling

5

M

Feb 9

Lab 4

Simulating a pull (Kanban) system

5

T

Feb

10

Lecture

9

Input analysis - parameter estimation (MLE)

5

R

Feb

12

Lecture

10

Input analysis - visualization and Q-Q plots



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

6

M

Feb

16

Lab 5

Data tables, non-stationary arrival process,

branching

6

T

Feb

17

Lecture

11

Input analysis - Q-Q plots

6

R

Feb

19

Lecture

12

Input analysis - chi-square test

7

M

Feb

23

Lab 6

Counting, branching, custom run setup, plots,

interpreting results

7

T

Feb

24

Lecture

13

Input analysis - K-S test

7

R

Feb

26

Lecture

14

Input analysis - arrival processes

8

M

Mar 2

Lab 7

User defined statistics

8

T

Mar 3

Lecture

15

Input analysis - arrival processes

8

R

Mar 5

Lecture

16

Random-variate generation - uniform random

variates

9

M

Mar 9

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

9

T

Mar

10

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

9

R

Mar

12

-

NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK

10

M

Mar

16

Exam

MIDTERM EXAM at 1:50-3:50pm in ETB

2026

10

T

Mar

17

Lecture

17

Random-variate generation - inversion

10

R

Mar

19

Lecture

18

Random-variate generation - acceptance

rejection

11

M

Mar

23

Lab 8

Introduction to processes

11

T

Mar

24

Lecture

19

Random-variate generation - arrival processes

11

R

Mar

26

Lecture

20

Verification

12

M

Mar

30

Lab 9

Use of lists, reliability logic

12

T

Mar

31

Lecture

21

Validation

12

R

Apr 2

Lecture

22

Output analysis - confidence intervals



WeekDayDate Event

Topic

Notes

13

M

Apr 6

Lab 10

Sequences, transporters, linking with data

tables

13

T

Apr 7

Lecture

23

Output analysis - bootstrapping

13

R

Apr 9

Lecture

24

Output analysis - error vs risk + visualization

14

M

Apr

13

Lab 11

Work schedule, function, use of processes

14

T

Apr

14

Lecture

25

Output analysis - terminating simulation

14

R

Apr

16

Lecture

26

Output analysis - system comparison

15

M

Apr

20

Lab 12

Simulation-based optimization (OptQuest and

KN method)

15

T

Apr

21

Lecture

27

Output analysis - common random numbers

15

R

Apr

23

Lecture

28

Simulation-based optimization (OptQuest and

KN method)

16

M

Apr

27

Review Review session

16

T

Apr

28

Lecture

29

Simulation-based optimization

16

R

Apr

30

Exam

FINAL EXAM at 12:30-2:30pm in ZACH 345

Registrar's

scheduled

final exam

date


## Additional Course Information


Copyright: All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, 'documents' means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, slides, homework and lab assignments, solutions, and all materials appearing on the class website. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit enterprise. Any use of or upload to the website Coursehero (or similar) for course materials will be treated as an academic code violation.