## ISEN 609 Syllabus


Section 600 (54141) Probability for Engineering Decisions Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: R

Start Time: 5:30PM

End Time: 8:30PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 211

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Petar Momcilovic

Email:

petar@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4043

Phone:

979 458 2374

Office Hours

TBD




## Catalog Description


Probability for Engineering Decisions. (3-0). Credit 3. Introduction to probability and stochastic processes for characterization of uncertainty in engineering decisions. Prerequisite: Approval of instructor.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): Approval of instructor.

An undergraduate course in probability for background material. Excellent skills in algebra, calculus and probability. Willing to use software (Python, R, Matlab).


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Use tools and techniques from probability theory to characterize uncertainty in engineering decisions


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials








This material Is: Required

Introduction to Probability Models

ISBN:

9780080467825

Authors:

Sheldon M. Ross

Publisher:

Elsevier

Publication Date:

2006-11-21

This material Is: Optional

Introduction to Stochastic Processes with R

ISBN:

9781118740729

Authors:

Robert P. Dobrow

Publisher:

John Wiley & Sons

Publication Date:

2016-04-06

This material Is: Optional

Modeling and Analysis of Stochastic Systems

Authors:

V. Kulkarni

This material Is: Optional

Introduction to Probability

ISBN:

9781886529236

Authors:

Dimitri Bertsekas, John N. Tsitsiklis

Publisher:

Athena Scientific

Publication Date:

2008-07-01

Notes:

undergraduate material




## Grading Policy


- Grading Scale: A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69%, F = &lt;60%.

- Weights: Assignments 20%, First exam 40%, Second exam 40%, Homework 0%.

- Assignments: no make-ups; take-home, open notes/book.

- First exam: in-class, closed-notes on October 22, 2026

- Second exam: non-cumulative, in-class, closed-notes on December 3, 2026

- Homework: Not collected; solutions will be given. Spend time solving the homework problems. Do not peek into the solutions too early. The homework problems have a programming component; implementing analytical concepts in software is crucial for their understanding.

- Grading appeals: Every effort will be made to ensure that grading is as objective and fair as possible. If you believe that there is an error in the grading, please submit, in writing, an appeal within one week of your work being returned. However, please be advised that if you submit such an appeal, the entire assignment/exam will be regraded to ensure that all parts are properly graded. As such, your grade on the exam could increase or decrease based on the secondary grading.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Work submitted after a deadline is considered late and will not be accepted.

This material Is: Optional

A First Course in Probability

ISBN:

9781292024929

Authors:

Sheldon Ross

Publication Date:

2013-07-31

Notes:

undergraduate material


## Course Schedule




Week

Topics

1-3

Review of basic probability (probability spaces and axioms;

conditional probability and dependence; law of total

probability and Beyes rule; random variables, distributions

and expectation operator; multivariate distributions;

computation of expectations; linearity of expectation)

4-7

Discrete-time Markov chains (modeling, transient analysis

and classification of states, steady-state analysis, balance

equations, Monte Carlo Markov chain)

9

First exam (October 22, 2026)

7, 8, 10

Dynamic programming (finite-horizon problems, infinite-

horizon discounted problems, value iteration and synthesis

of optimal policy, policy iteration)

11-13

Continuous-time Markov chains (exponential distribution,

modeling, Poisson process and its properties, transient

analysis and classification of states, steady-state analysis,

embedded chain)

15

Second exam (December 3, 2026)