## ISEN 645 Syllabus


Section 700 (55965) Lean Engineering Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ONLINE ONLINE

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Michael Graul, PhD PE

Email:

mgraul@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4017

Phone:

979-458-5545

Office Hours

F 5-6p and by appt

Preferred Contact Method

email


## Catalog Description


Lean Engineering. (3-0). Credit 3. Introduces the principles of lean thinking in modern manufacturing systems; philosophical, managerial and organizational requirements studied; lean manufacturing quantitative modeling methodologies, lean manufacturing cell design and case study analysis. Prerequisites: ISEN 609 or approval of instructor.




## Additional Course Details


I will provide a more detailed description of the material for each week/class in the lecture notes.

Lean engineering is a blend of principle and practice applied to production systems. A lean production system is one that generates goods and services with minimal buffering of products and resources. Systems engineering provides a compendium of methods and models to represent and characterize the complex nature of production systems and their interdependencies. The course is architected to expose the students to the knowledge, skills, and experiences (KSEs) of lean engineering applied to production systems. The semester project provides the experiential component, the text and state of the practice readings provide the knowledge, and classroom exercises, management tools, and homework provide the backbone for the skills dimension.

The core principles of lean production systems are summarized as value, value stream, flow, control, and perfection . The lectures and class discussions have been organized around these 5-core principles. Like most systems, the LPS requires maintenance, or it decays. The principle of perfection alludes to the never-ending drive towards the 'lean production system upon a hill' - that is, true single-piece flow and quantity control enabled through quality control. But it is during LPS design that we must instrument for waste accounting and PS 'health' monitoring. 6σ (variability reduction) is intrinsic to LPS design.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 609 or approval of instructor.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

2. Analyze and Design - using SE and factory physics principles, practices, methods, and tools - a production system with minimal buffering.
3. Leverage 6σ methods, tools, and techniques to identify sources of - and reduce variation in - both existing and proposed PS operations.
4. Architect, using SE methods, a productive organization that is congruent with a lean-6σ culture.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required
The Lean Toolbox Revised Sixth Edition
ISBN:
9781739167431
Authors:
John Bicheno, Matthias Holweg
Publication Date:
2024-06-19




This material Is: Required
Lean Thinking
ISBN:
9781439135952
Authors:
James P. Womack, Daniel T. Jones
Publisher:
Simon and Schuster
Publication Date:
2010-11-23
This material Is: Required
Factory Physics for Managers (Pb)
ISBN:
9781265613716
Authors:
Edward Pound
Publisher:
McGraw-Hill Companies
Publication Date:
2023-03-31
This material Is: Optional
Supply Chain Science
ISBN:
9780073403328
Authors:
Wallace Hopp
Publisher:
McGraw-Hill/Irwin
Publication Date:
2007-10-12
This material Is: Optional
Factory Physics
ISBN:
9781478609049
Authors:
Wallace J. Hopp, Mark L. Spearman
Publisher:
Waveland Press
Publication Date:
2011-08-31

This material Is: Optional
Learning to See
ISBN:
9780966784305
Authors:
Mike Rother, John Shook
Publisher:
Lean Enterprise Institute
Publication Date:
2003-01-01

## Grading Policy

The content of this course material must be internalized by you to be of ultimate value in your own professional career. The approach that I will use to help you internalize the knowledge of Lean systems is simple: Recitation + Application + Enriched Repetition. I will use the quizzes as a way to ensure you have initiated this learning process and we will then use lean exercise and project work to help you fully internalize the concepts of Lean Thinking and Lean Manufacturing.
Quizzes [15%] - A quiz will be given weekly; a time window will be identified for initiating the quiz along with a time available for its completion once initiated.
Homework [15%] - there will be several small, design, modeling, and analysis exercises assigned throughout the semester. These exercises will be used to drive home key principles and practices of Lean. Each HW assignment will make clear whether it is individual or team based. In the later half of the semester the HW assignments will be coordinated with elements of your project to serve as draft artifacts in your project design.
Midterm exam [35%] - this take-home exam will cover basic principles, practices, and concepts from systems engineering, factory physics, and material flow.
Project Work [35%] - Additionally I will assign a team-based project during the semester that will pull together concepts from the lean homework but will be focused on an entire production system design and/or operation. A rubric for the project will be provided when we initiate the project.
Final grades will be assigned as follows: A: [90,100] B: [80-90) C: [70,80) D: [60,70) F: [0,60)

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).
1:
2:

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Canvas is the system of record for this course.
Late quizzes are not accepted.
Late midterm exams will not be accepted.
Late projects will not be accepted.
Late homework acceptance policy: late homework can be submitted after the deadline but loses 20% of its value; no HW will be accepted after the grader uploads the comments and scores without prior permission due to extenuating circumstances. Your grade and comments regarding the homework will be made available through Canvas.
Other issues associated with late work can be resolved through application of Student Rule 7.
The makeup work policy is described in the syllabus section covering University Policies.

## Course Schedule

OV
Topical outline

Class
Core Topic / Theme
Technical focus
24AUG
Introduction to Lean;
Value
- VOC
visually aligned in the PS;
instrumenting the PS for 6σ
(DFSS)
Core principles and definitions;
Characterizing Value in the PS
using IDEF0; Lean PS design
principles
31AUG
Characterizing
Value
in the
Value
Stream; Lenses of lean
Value represented in the PS:
IDEF0 and VOC
à
VOE
à
VOP
No class on 7SEP - Labor Day holiday
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:

14SEP
Engineering the
Value Stream
for
flow
Value Stream Mapping; 8-Step
design process; IDEF3 - process
engineering
21SEP
Engineering the
Value Stream
for
control
Cell design; resource requirements
estimation; Line balancing;
28SEP
Engineering the cell - Flow
Task engineering / WM&M;
'SMED'; 5S
5OCT
Control
ling the
Flow
Level loading; MM sequencing;
EPE; Kanban; CONWIP; int IC &
PC
12OCT
Guest lecture: Dr. Mark
Spearman
Operations Science and FP
papers
19OCT
PS engineering for
variability
in
the PS
flow
; instrumenting for flow
imbalances; management
Factory Physics Principles; the
equation of lean; 3EQN/4GRA;
Buffer engineering (time, capacity,
inventory)
26OCT
Lean supply chain P&P
Principles; SC definition and
design
2NOV
Lean supply chain P&P;
midterm
exam (2NOV assigned)
Integration with the PS via
inventory
9NOV
Lean SC P&P;
midterm exam
(9NOV due)
In class Beer game
competition  (team design
project assigned)
16NOV
Perfection
: Lean 6σ DMAIC
VOC; SIPOC; C/E chaining
23NOV
Perfection
: Lean 6σ DMAIC
Gauge R&R; SPC
30NOV
Perfection
: Gemba Kaizen, Kata,
Culture
Implementation / Action planning /
Leadership, Culture
Projects due NLT 6DEC at 2400h