## ISEN 614 Syllabus


Section 700 (66484) Advanced Quality Control

Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ONLINE ONLINE

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Jaesung Lee

Email:

j.lee@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4016

Phone:

979-458-2373

Office Hours

Tuesday 10:50-11:50


## Catalog Description


Advanced Quality Control. (3-0). Credit 3. Advanced methods applied to quality control and anomaly detection; classical treatments and recent developments in statistical process control; evaluation, design and maintenance of quality control programs; focus on monitoring and root cause identification. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

Basically, following knowledge is necessary

3. Knowledge on hypothesis test and linear regression (STAT212, ISEN 350, or equivalent).

## Course Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:
- Understand basic principles of change and anomaly detection;
- Learn to use the basic data analysis tools for detection;
- Comprehend the applications of change and anomaly detection methods to manufacturing quality control, medical error detection, and other applications.

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Optional
Introduction to Statistical Quality Control Authors: Montgomery
This material Is: Optional
Applied Multivariate Statistical Analysis Authors:
R. A. Johnson, R. A., and D. W. Wichern

## Grading Policy

Three Exams: 65% In-class Exercise: 15% Homework: 10%
Course Project: 10%
90 - 100 A 80 - 89.9 B 70 - 79.9 C 60 - 69.9 D Below - 59.9 F
There will be multiple in-class exercises. During class, you will solve the inclass exercises. You will solve the exercise problems on paper sheets but submit your answers through Canvas quizzes online, which will be available on the date the exercise is taken in the class and by the next date of the release. You will have two chances to submit your answers. The answers will be automatically graded. If you do not submit your answers on Canvas, your work will not be graded. To show you have solved the exercise by yourself, you will submit the scanned answer sheet through the last question of each exercise. If you do not submit the scanned answer sheet, you may receive zero points for the exercise. Please remember you still need to submit your answers to the individual questions in the quiz module. Otherwise, your work will not be graded even if you submit the scanned answer sheet.
You will have multiple homework and be given a week to submit them. (If homework is given on Wednesday, the due is Tuesday.) You will submit your homework through Canvas. Both in-class exercises and homework are designed to help you fully understand and employ the concept you learned during the class.
As part of the assigned work for this course, you are required to conduct a course project. The purpose of the project is different from doing homework. It is to give you a feeling of how to handle a real-life dataset, make decisions yourself, and justify your undertaking. Performing this project encourages you to explore an avenue related to, but not limited to, the material in the class. You may need to read additional literature and broaden your knowledge base. Students are encouraged to form a team of either two to three students (individual submission without teaming is accepted). Each team should submit one written report.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Schedule

Weekly Schedule

Weeks
Topic
Week 1
Course Introduction
Week 2
Probability Distributions
Week 3
Statistical Inference, Confidence Interval,
Hypothesis Testing
Week 4
Hypothesis Testing, Errors
Week 5
Control Chart, ARL
Week 6
Exam 1
Week 7
Three discrete Distributions
Week 8
Attribute Control Charts
Spring break
Week 9
Regression-based Risk Adjustment
Week 10
Multivariate Statistics
Week 11
Exam 2
Week 12
T2 Charts
Week 13
PCA and Data Reduction
Week 14
Exam 3

Weeks
Topic
Project Due

## Additional Course Information

Statistics Capable (hand-held) Calculator: (Ex. TI 84 Plus, TI 89, Nspire, etc.) is required. Be sure to bring your calculator to all Lectures .
Software : Matlab (or equivalent programming language, such as R, Python , EXCEL, and Minitab.
Course Materials & Copyright: All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, "documents" means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, quizzes, exams, problem sets, slide sets, videos, and all materials appearing on the class website or sent to you via email. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy or share any of them for any purpose other than your personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit enterprise, or uploaded elsewhere for sharing.