## ISEN 640 Syllabus


Section 600 (55318) Systems Thinking and Analysis Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: M

Start Time: 6:00PM

End Time: 8:30PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 160

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Joseph Geunes

Email:

geunes@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4024

Phone:

(979) 862-9114

Office Hours

TBD

Richard Mayer

Email:

ricmayer@tamu.edu

Office Location:

Zoom

Phone:

979-260-5274

Office Hours

By appointment




## Catalog Description


Systems Thinking and Analysis. (3-0). Credit 3. Introduction to the systems thinking process and the fundamental considerations associated with the engineering of large-scale systems, or systems engineering. Prerequisite: MATH 304 or approval of instructor.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): MATH 304 or approval of instructor.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

1. LO 1. Understand the anatomy of engineered systems and their complex interactions.
2. LO 2. Formulate, analyze, and interpret issues associated with engineered systems. Separate symptoms, concerns, opportunities. Diagnose and identify causes (problem).
3. LO 3. Use systems thinking techniques and methods, and software tools necessary for systems engineering practice.
4. LO 4. Use critical thinking techniques to model, critique, and analyze engineered systems using systems engineering methods and tools.
5. LO 5. Function in multidisciplinary teams.
6. LO 6. Communicate ideas, verbally and in writing.
7. LO 7. Appreciate national and global systems engineering issues from a variety of perspectives.

### Special Course Designation

None

### Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: No required textbook
No Textbook Needed

### Grading Policy

#### GRADE COMPONENTS

The grade for the course will be based on two exams (Exam 1 - (Midterm), and Exam 2 (Final) and Homework grades. Weekly homework (assignments & quizzes) will be given. Solutions for each assignment will be posted one week after grading is completed for students to check their solutions. The student is advised to start working on assignments early and submit early. Resubmissions are allowed after the grading is made up till one week or until the solutions are posted.

#### GRADE ASSIGNMENT

The course grade will be assigned as follows: Exam 1 (25%), Exam 2 (25%), and Homework (50%). Letter grades will be assigned as follows: A for 90% - 100%, B for 80% - 89.9%, C for 70% - 79.9%, D for 60% - 69.9%, F for below 60%. This course covers standard material on systems engineering and there is usually no curve on grades. Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days of the return of the graded material. No grade will be changed beyond the two business days limit. Grades will be maintained in the Gradebook within Canvas.

### Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

### Course Schedule


Week
Topic
Reading
1
Course Overview
Introduction to Systems Thinking &
Analysis
See Lecture Refs,
Ramey Guidebook
Ch.1&2
2
Engineered Systems Life Cycle &
Development
See Lecture Refs
3
Methods for Systems Thinking and
Analysis
See Lecture Refs
4
Methods for Systems Thinking and
Analysis
See Lecture Refs
5
Systems Description Languages
See Lecture Refs
6
Systems Description Languages
See Lecture Refs
7
Theory of Systems Design
See Lecture Refs
8
Systems Modeling
See Lecture Refs
9
Modeling & System Architectures
See Lecture Refs
10
Systems Thinking in Engineering
Design
See Lecture Refs
11
Model Based Systems Engineering
See Lecture Refs
12
Model Based Decision Making &
Trade-offs
See Lecture Refs
13
Complex Adaptive Systems Definition
& Development
See Lecture Refs
14
Documenting the SE Process & Final
Review
See Lecture Refs