# ISEN 665 Syllabus


Section 600 (59566) Management of Engineering Systems Spring 2026 - College Station


# Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: M

Start Time: 5:45PM

End Time: 8:15PM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 440

Credit Hours:

3


# Instructor Details


Michael Graul, PhD PE

Email:

mgraul@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4017; ZACH 403D

Phone:

979-575-7162

Office Hours

Via zoom:  F 4-5p; SU 4-5p

Link:  https://tamu.zoom.us/j/93939680794?pwd=3ZRBzQraKRM3AgzpzYf0Qi2s2EpjMu.1


## Preferred Contact Method


mgraul@tamu.edu


# Catalog Description


Management of Engineering Systems. (3-0). Credit 3. Theory and practice of leadership and management in engineering organizations; focus on both 'hard' skills (systems engineering process, project management, planning, forecasting and financial analysis) and 'soft' skills (leadership styles, motivation, teamwork, managing creative people, navigating informal networks); science and technology policy, economic implications of engineering and technology. Prerequisite: Graduate classification. Cross-listed with SYEN 645.




# Additional Course Details


NB: Lecture simulcast for section 700: https://tamu.zoom.us/j/99872586429?pwd=5avC5LQThxhMfHqvL4k8GUEZ7Blckl.1

ISEN 665 prepares the engineer for the effective management of complex system efforts. The scope is the system lifecycle - the system itself may be technologically based or socio-technical in nature. A system is a set of elements so arranged as to produce (desired) functions and behaviors. Production systems, as a class of systems, represent one of the more complex system types to manage effectively due to its socio-technical nature and the interdependencies, uncertainties, and often conflicting goals of its elements. Depending on the magnitude of the system being managed - effective management may necessitate the need to apportion the system into logical groupings to simplify the application of the core management functions (planning, organizing, controlling). The course covers this apportionment of a system into projects, thrust areas, and programs in order to facilitate its management. Additionally, the sociotechnical nature of complex (production) systems requires emphasis on managerial cybernetics and organization system design - and their relationship to common issues associated with large system definition, implementation, execution, and sustainment.

Complex systems defy simple representation. Thus, the manager must be adept at conceptualizing the facets of the system being managed and controlled. Over the course of the last several decades there have been numerous, well-intentioned attempts, to define a single, holistic architecture that represents the *thing* being managed. No success to date. Therefore, the manager must be attuned to, and minimally competent in, the use of several prescriptive and descriptive methods and techniques that collectively proxy for the *thing* being managed. Models and conceptualizations are endemic to the management of complex systems.

This course is a fusion of the core functions of the engineering manager enabled through a set of skills that foster technical communication among engineers, technologists, technicians, and business professionals.

ISEN 665 works equally well as both a gateway course into engineering systems management and also as a capstone course for the application of the core functions and skills endemic to the engineering systems manager.


# Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): Graduate classification. Cross Listing: SYEN 645/ISEN 665.


# Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

1. Define, identify, and apply knowledge of management functions (leading, planning, organizing, and controlling) and contemporary support tools and practices (project management, earned value management, critical chain project management, etc.) to the life-cycle management of engineered systems
2. To apply modern planning techniques for management of complex system, technology projects
3. To apply organizational techniques to the effective management of technology projects
4. To apply management control techniques to the effective management of technology projects
5. To apply decision making techniques to the effective management of technology projects
6. To define and apply knowledge of management functions to the life-cycle of technology programs
7. An ability to manage multi-role teams
8. An ability to communicate project status information effectively
9. An ability to establish a cogent technical argument that characterizes the problem definition, needs analysis, and requirements definition for a complex engineering system problem

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Required
Managing Engineering and Technology.
Authors:
Morse, Schell, and Babcock
Publisher:
Pearson
Publication Date:
2020
Edition:
7th Edition
Notes:

## Recommended :

System Engineering Management, 5 th  Edition by Blanchard and Blyler. Wiley 2016. NB: this book is available for checkout online through the TAMU library system.
During the semester I will also identify readings from a variety of sources (papers, texts, etc.) and make those known to you through the class notes. All sources and resources leveraged by me in the development and execution of this course will be identified to you for your own study.
Course notes will be uploaded prior to class; announcement, modifications to the course schedule and/or topical refinements will be maintained in the course notes.

## Grading Policy

The content of this course material must be internalized by you to be of ultimate value in your own professional career. The approach that I will use to help you internalize the knowledge of management techniques applied to engineered systems is simple: Recitation + Application + Enriched Repetition. I will use the quizzes as a way to ensure you have initiated this learning process and we will then use homework exercises and project work to help you fully internalize the concepts of the course.
Quizzes [20%] - An announced quiz will be given weekly; a time window will be identified for initiating the quiz along with a time available for its completion once initiated.
Homework [20%] - there will be several small, design, modeling, and analysis exercises assigned throughout the semester. These exercises will be used to drive home key principles and practices of engineering system management. Each HW assignment will make clear whether it is individual or team based. To the extent possible they will be related to or coordinated with your semester project so as to serve as either exemplar or draft artifacts in your project design.
Midterm exam [30%] - a take-home exam will provide an assessment covering the core principles and practices of the engineering management corpus. The midterm is designed to ensure competency with core elements of ESM prior to the group work requirements of the project.
Project Work [30%] - Additionally I will assign a small team-based project later in the semester that will pull together concepts from the 665 corpus and homework but will be focused on the management of a technology or production system effort. Topics: TBA.
Final grades will be assigned as follows:
A: {100 ≥ x ≥ 90}, B: {90 &gt; x ≥ 80}, C: {80 &gt; x ≥ 70}, D: {70 &gt; x ≥ 60}, F: {60 &gt; x}
NB: ALL course quizzes, HW assignments, projects, and exams will be completed using Canvas. The midterm exam is a 'take-home' (dates identified in the schedule) and as such will be entered in Canvas as an 'assignment' with an inviolable due date identified. Standard submission assessments using applications such as 'Turnitin' will be in use for all student files uploaded to Canvas.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Late quizzes are not accepted. Quizzes will be timed within a 'window' within which to start and complete the quiz. For example, I may assign a 30min timed quiz and open the window to take the quiz on Friday at 5p and close that window on Sunday at 11:59p. Thus, you would have 30min to complete the quiz once you initiate the quiz. This not a typing contest - the quiz time
will be padded with time to download/upload your solutions. Late homework policy: late homework can be submitted after the deadline but loses 20% of its value; no HW will be accepted after the grader uploads the comments and scores without prior permission due to extenuating circumstances. Your grade and comments regarding the homework will be made available through canvas. Other issues associated with can be resolved through application of Student Rule 7. NB: Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempted from the late work policy (Student Rule 7). Instructions for the mid-term and project submissions will be supplied later in the semester.
NB: it is important to submit the assignments on time or within the submission window. Canvas identifies the exact time at which uploads were made and further when access of any type was made to the Canvas site. Please make sure that you have a stable connection when making submissions. Canvas is the system of record. Emailing me or the TA the submissions does not constitute a submission since Canvas will not have recorded the submission. All of the course work is to be submitted through Canvas.

## Course Schedule

I will provide a more detailed description of the material for each week/class in the lecture notes. Engineering management is a blend of principle and practice applied to complex technological systems. The type and scope of the system being managed can vary widely as can the phase of life-cycle that the system is identified with. Structural definitions and constructs adopted for organizational clarity can often belie the integrated and complex nature of the system being managed. Systems engineering provides a compendium of methods and models to represent and characterize the complex nature of systems and their interdependencies. The course is architected to expose the students to the knowledge, skills, and experiences (KSEs) of management applied to engineering systems. The semester project provides the experiential component, the text and state of the practice readings provide the knowledge, and classroom exercises, management tools, and homework provide the backbone for the skills dimension.



2MAY .  Grades for graduating students are due by 6MAY.

## Additional Course Information

## Leveraging AI technology as a resource

The ability to rapidly assimilate information across a large number of disparate sources is very useful to the engineer. Unfortunately, the use and acceptance of AI technology is still in its infancy and the veracity of the AI generated information is not easily vetted nor is there a standard process by which the vetting is acceptable across the academic community. Regardless, it is a resource - but due to its volatility (same prompt, different AI-bot, varied response) and sometimes questionable provenance (what, exactly, did it assimilate in order to generate its response) the use of this technology must be carefully documented by you. The burden of veracity is placed on the user.
If you choose to leverage AI technologies of any type then you must, append to your submission, the following documentation:
1. The time, date, and the exact AI technology (also termed AI-bot (for AI-Chatbot) below) used
2. The full specification of the prompt that was used; including the progression of prompts used to generate the result
3. The full response provided by the AI-bot
4. A discussion of how and where you leveraged the AI generated material in the course artifact being produced
5. A full verification, by you, of the response from the AI-bot; this is akin to a literature review for each of the points made by the AI-bot that were leveraged by you in your submission
6. A statement, signed by you, attesting to the veracity of the response from the AI-bot
Clearly, with a timed quiz, use of AI technology makes little sense - since you would have the added burden of supplying the aforementioned documentation as part of the timed submission. Additionally, the HW, midterm, and project are largely model-based, thus the use of AI may also be of limited value versus the additional documentation required.
Any submission made using AI-based inputs, but not documented IAW the 6-steps above, will be considered an academic honor violation.