## ISEN 615 Syllabus


Section 700 (48504) Production and Inventory Control Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Alaa Elwany

Email:

elwany@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4045

Phone:

9794582365

Office Hours

Tuesdays 10:00 - 11:00 am

Preferred Contact Method

Email


## Catalog Description


Production and Inventory Control. (3-0). Credit 3. Model development for inventory management and for production planning; production control models for line balancing, lot sizing, dispatching, scheduling, releasing, kitting, MRP and just-in-time with treatment of flexible manufacturing and assembly. Prerequisites: ISEN 620; ISEN 609.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 620; ISEN 609.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Provide an in-depth coverage of the analytical methods used to solve operations management problems and support the production function. Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- describe different types and levels of decision making in a production system

- model, formulate, solve, analyze problems arising in aggregate production and supply chain planning

- model and analyze fundamental inventory control systems with certain/uncertain demand

- describe and analyze push (MRP) and pull production systems (JIT)

- model and solve deterministic operations scheduling problems

- model and solve basic project scheduling problems


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

## Grading Policy


Assignments (Home Works or other): 10%

Exams: 90%

There will be four exams :

1. The first three exams are not comprehensive and will cover roughly one third of course materials.
2. At the end of the course, one optional comprehensive final exam will be held.
3. The lowest exam grade out of these five exams will be dropped, and the overall course grade will be based on the four remaining exam grades at 30% weight each, towards the overall course grade.
Final grades will be assigned as follows:
A: [90,100]  B: [80-90)  C: [70,80)  D: [50,70)  F: [0,50)

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Schedule

The following represents when home works will be assigned or posted. Due date will be set for each home work on Canvas Wk 1: HW 1
This material Is: Optional
Production and Operations Analytics
ISBN:
9781478646303
Authors:
Steven Nahmias, Tava Lennon Olsen
Publisher:
Waveland Press
Publication Date:
2020-10-01
Edition:
8th
Wk 2: HW 2
Wk 3: HW 3
Wk 4: HW 4
Wk 6: HW 5
Wk 7: HW 6
Wk 8: HW 7
Wk 10: HW 8
Wk 11: HW 9
Wk 12: HW 10
WK 14: HW 11
Exams Schedule:
Exam 1: 9/24/26
Exam 2: 10/29/26
Exam 3: 12/03/26
Exam 4: 12/07/26 (COMPREHENSIVE FINAL)
All items in the schedule above are subject to change. Any changes will be communicated by the instructor 1 week a priori.
If no changes or modifications are announced, you are expected to follow the schedule above.

## Course Specific Attendance Policy

Attendance is not mandatory, but it is strongly encouraged. While there is no formal penalty for missing an individual class, the instructor may periodically record attendance to monitor participation. Important details regarding assignments, exam instructions, or date changes are often announced during class, and students are responsible for staying informed of any such information if they are absent.