## ISEN 616 Syllabus


Section 700 (39910) Design and Analysis of Industrial Experiments Spring 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ONLINE ONLINE

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Rui Tuo

Email:

ruituo@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4012

Phone:

979-458-2345

Office Hours

9:30-11 am MW or by appointment

Preferred Contact Method

Email


## Catalog Description


Design and Analysis of Industrial Experiments. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental theory, concepts and procedures required for industrial experimental design, statistical data analysis, and model building, with emphasis on engineering formulations and applications; one-factor experiments with and without restrictions on randomization, treatment comparison procedures, Latin and other squares, factorial experiments, full and fractional two-level factorial experiments, blocking in factorial designs, response surface methodologies and introduction to Taguchi methods. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

Participants will be assumed to have basic knowledge in statistics, including parameter estimation, hypothesis testing and confidence intervals. Read the pre-course reading materials to refresh your knowledge.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand formulations, concepts, and analytical procedures for design and analysis of industrial experiments;

- Understand fundamental principles of design and off-line experimentation techniques;

- Apply design tools in industrial applications;

- Evaluate data-collecting, and experiment planning capability.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required

Experiments: Planning, Analysis and Optimization, 3nd Edition (by C. F. Jeff Wu and Mike Hamada), 2021, John Wiley.

Notes:

Thanks to the support of Texas A&M University Libraries, you can access the Wu-Hamada textbook for free:

http://proxy.library.tamu.edu/login?url=https://app.knovel.com/hotlink/toc/id:kpEPAOE002/experiments-planninganalysis?kpromoter=marc

This material Is: Recommended R

Notes:

R statistical software package will be used for the example discussed in class, home assignments and examination. Please install the R software on your laptop from http://cran.r-project.org . You will use this software for homework assignments.

This material Is: Optional

Design and Analysis of Experiments with R. (by Lawson, John), 2014. CRC press.


## Grading Policy


- Grades assigned are A for 90%-100%, B for 80%-89.9%, C for 70%79.9%, D for 60%-69.9% and F for less than 60%.

- Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days of the return of the graded material. No grade will be changed beyond the two business days limit.

- Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas.

- Grading components:

Homework - 10%

Exam 1 - 20% Exam 2 - 20% Final Exam - 30% Group Project - 20%


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Homework will be released on Canvas and is due on the designated. Late homework will be docked by 15% per every day it is late. No extensions will be made if the due date is your job interview day/exam day/holiday/etc. For homework before two exams (I will remind you which ones are those), no late homework will be accepted. If you would like to have your homework or exam re-graded, you have to do so within 10 days from the time when the homework/exam is returned to you.

Description of the project tasks will be announced on Canvas. Project report is due on the designated date. Late project report will be docked by 15% per every day it is late


## Course Schedule

## Course Contents/Topics


4. Factorial experiments at two levels, comparison with 'one-factor-at-atime' plans, analysis of location and dispersion, choice of optimal blocking schemes
5. Fractional factorial experiments at two levels, maximum resolution and minimum aberration for choosing optimal designs, choice of optimal blocking schemes
6. Orthogonal arrays
7. Introduction to fractional factorial experiments at three levels
8. Variation reduction, robust parameter design for product and process improvement

### Course Schedule

    - Week 1  Topic 1
    - Week 2  Topic 2
    - Weeks 4-5  Topic 3
    - Weeks 6-8  Topic 4
    - Week 9 Spring break
    - Weeks 10-11  Topic 5
    - Week 12  Topic 6
    - Week 13-14 Topic 7
    - Week 15 Topic 8

### EXAM SCHEDULE

Exam 1
: Friday February 13.
Exam 2
: Friday April 17.
Final Exam:
Thursday April 30.
Detailed arrangements regarding online exams will be announced separately.