## ISEN 641 Syllabus


Section 600 (59191) Systems Engineering Methods and Frameworks Spring 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: T

Start Time: 6:00PM

End Time: 8:30PM

Start Date: 01/12/2026

End Date: 05/05/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 440

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Michael Graul

Email:

mgraul@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4017 and ZACH 403D

Phone:

979-575-7162

Office Hours

FRI and SUN 3-4p via zoom link: https://tamu.zoom.us/j/92077192436?pwd=YPvt6NpI0rT9mSU9H5NdaCxEIty2ar.1

Preferred Contact Method

mgraul@tamu.edu




## Catalog Description


Systems Engineering Methods and Frameworks. (3-0). Credit 3. Concepts, methodology, methods and tools for discovery, definition, analysis, design, creation, and sustainment of systems involving information, physical, and human elements; architecture modeling methods include IDEF/UPDM; systems engineering frameworks include DoDAF/MoDAF, and Zachman; analysis tools include executable architectures to assess consistency, interoperability and performance. Prerequisites: MATH 304 or approval of instructor.


## Additional Course Details


course details


### From the instructor


This course is designed to provide the students with an understanding of the concepts, methodology, methods and tools of systems discovery, definition, analysis, design, creation, and sustainment. The main focus of the course is to develop the students' critical thinking skills to 1) define and analyze the as-is system, 2) develop and communicate the to-be system requirements, 3) transition these requirements into the design specification of a new or modified system, and 4) evaluate the value, correctness, interoperability, and performance of a system design. ISEN 640 is highly recommended as a prerequisite for this course


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): MATH 304 or approval of instructor.


## Course Learning Outcomes


The student will learn the component methods for systems architecting including: function modeling, process modeling, information and data modeling, ontology modeling and representation, software and system behavioral and structural design, systems dynamics modeling. The student will also learn the standard frameworks for structuring the systems development process and documenting the resulting artifacts. Finally the student will learn the core techniques for system architecture analysis including: requirements analysis, allocation, assessment, and design traceability, 2) design verification, validation, and completeness (VV&C), 3) cost / performance/risk tradeoff analysis, and 4) simulation based (Monte Carlo and Systems Dynamics) architecture performance assessment. In summary the learning objectives of this course include:

1. Mastery of component methods for system Architecting:


### a. Activity Modeling

### b. Process Modeling

### c. Information and Data Modeling

### d. Knowledge Modeling

### e. Factor Trees and Causal Loop Diagrams

### f. Solution Creation with DoDAF AV, CV, OV, DIV-1, SysML

### g. System Design with SysML, DoDAF SV, DIV-2/3

### Mastery of 'framework' of methods


2. for structuring the approach to systems development
3. Familiarization with basic architecting and analysis methods:

## a. Symptom collection and diagnosis

## b. Need condition formulation

## c. Requirement constraint formulation

## d. Requirements Analysis, Allocation, Assessment, and Traceability

## e. Analysis of Alternatives

## f. Verification, Validation, and Completeness (VV&C)

## g. Cost / Performance Based Trades

# h. Simulation based architecture evaluation and performance assessment

4. Familiarization with documentation for system development life cycle artifacts

## Special Course Designation

None

## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

This material Is: Required
The student is required to acquire and study references called out in each module. Past lectures will be made available for review on-line

## Grading Policy

Grading policy grading policy

### Grading policy

Class attendance is required unless otherwise arranged with the instructor. Homework is due as stated on each Canvas managed assignment.  Class time will be used to discuss HW solutions.  Late homework may or may not be accepted at the sole discretion of the instructor, except as provided for in the Student Rules regarding Academics at http://studentrules.tamu.edu. Take home examinations are due at the time and date stated on the Canvas assignment. Late examination submissions are not accepted, except as provided for in the Student Rules regarding Academics at http://student-rules.tamu.edu. The material in this course is best learned through actual 'doing'. Systems Engineering is predominantly practiced a team environment.
Therefore the grades will be determined through student performance on homework assignments and in class participation as well as through examinations.
1. Homework (25%)
2. Class Participation + Quizzes 25%
3. Take home mid-term exam  25%
4. Final exam  25%
Optional assignments and test questions may be made available for extra credit.

#### Grading scale

#### Grading Scale

Grading will be on the Standard Letter Grading Scale:
A = 90-100
B = 80-89
C = 70-79
D = 60-69
F = &lt;60

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Schedule

This course will start with the study of component systems as simple or complex hybrids, involving information, computation, mechanical, and human elements. Later in the course we will study 'capabilities' that are formed as collections of interoperating systems - referred to in the current vernacular as a system of systems, or SOS. We will study the way engineered orchestration of the interoperability and combined performance of the collection will result in a desired capability. Throughout the course we will study methods, languages, and techniques that enable us to 'view' and analyze the as-is system, develop and communicate the to-be system requirements, and transition these requirements into the design specification of a new or modified system. The initial modeling methods focus will be the IDEF function, information, process, data, and ontology modeling methods.. Our study will be performed within the context of the systems development life cycle and the use of frameworks for applying the systems engineering discipline. The DoD Architecture Framework (DoDAF) will be the primary structure studied. Other enterprise architectural frameworks such as MoDAF, FEAF, and the Zachman AF will be overviewed. The SysML/UML languages will be covered as they are a key component in these frameworks and the current basis for MBSE (Model Based Systems   Engineering). The primary analysis tools covered will be systems dynamics simulation. The foundational methods of factor trees and causal loop diagrams that support creation of systems dynamics simulation will be covered.
Topical outline schedule continuation

Week
Topic
Required Reading
1
Overview of System Engineering & Architectures
Methods
See Lecture Slides
2
Function Architecture Method
See Lecture Slides
3
Function Architecture Practice
See Lecture Slides
4
Information & Data Architecture History, Theory,
& Method
See Lecture Slides

See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides
See Lecture Slides

### 5 Information Architecture Practice

### 6 Process Architecture Method

### 7 Process Architecture Practice

## 7 Mid Term Take Home Exam Distributed to Students

### 8 DoDAF Part I & SysML/UML Introduction

### 8 Mid Term Take Home Exam Response Due

### 9 DoDAF Part II & SysML/UML Basics

### 10 DoDAF Part II & SysML/UML Practice

### 11 SySML

### 12 SySML Practice

## 13 Ontology Architecture History, Theory, Method & Practice

### Systems dynamics emphasis

# 14 Factor Trees, Causal Loops & Systems Dynamics Simulation

## 14 Systems Dynamics Practice and System Documentation

### 14      Final exam distributed to students

### Additional Course Information

    Required lecture reference readings are included in the lecture slides. Select prior year lectures, some reference materials/required readings, and this semesters lectures will be made available on Canvas. It is highly recommended that students avail themselves of this resource.