## ISEN 660 Syllabus


Section 700 (63232) Risk Engineering Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days:

Start Time: N/A

End Time: N/A

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ONLINE ONLINE

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Nancy Currie-Gregg

Email:

currie-gregg@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4080 | ZACH 510C

Phone:

979-458-2342

Office Hours

Monday/Thursday 3:00-4:00 p.m.


### Preferred Contact Method


Communication with the instructor throughout the semester is highly encouraged. Students needing assistance should attend office hours with either the instructor or GTA. Additionally, to provide timely responses to student questions and rapid delivery of announcements to the class, an MS Teams site will be established and used throughout the semester. All students must have access to MS Teams and accept the invitation to join the course site. Communication via MS Teams is highly preferred instead of email.



Any communications with the instructor that contain personal information must be done via private chat through MS Teams. MS Teams chats/messages may also be used for student-student communications or to post questions to the entire class or sub-groups.


### Webpage: https://safe.engr.tamu.edu/ Biography


Dr. Nancy Currie-Gregg is the Director of the Texas A&M University Space Institute. As the Don Lummus '58 Professor of Practice in Engineering, she holds joint appointments in the Departments of Aerospace Engineering and Industrial and Systems Engineering at Texas A&M University's College of Engineering. Internationally recognized for her human-system integration, safety engineering, and risk management expertise, her research focuses on optimizing human performance and safety in aerospace systems. She also serves on the National Academies Board of Human Systems Integration and the Board of Directors for the Texas Space Commission.

Dr. Currie-Gregg spent the majority of her career supporting NASA's human spaceflight programs. A former NASA astronaut, she flew on four space shuttle missions, logging over 1,000 hours in space, and made significant contributions to the development of human spaceflight operations. Following the Space Shuttle Columbia tragedy, she managed the Space Shuttle Program Safety and Mission Assurance Office, overseeing the agency's return-to-flight efforts. She later served as Principal Engineer and Chief Engineer with the NASA Engineering and Safety Center, where she led independent engineering assessments for high-risk human spaceflight initiatives. A retired U.S. Army Colonel and Master Army Aviator, she accrued more than 4,000 flight hours in both rotary- and fixed-wing aircraft.

Dr. Currie-Gregg holds a Bachelor's degree in Biological Sciences with honors from The Ohio State University, a Master of Science in Safety Engineering from the University of Southern California, and a Ph.D. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Houston.


### Socials


[https://www.linkedin.com/in/curriegregg/](https://www.linkedin.com/in/curriegregg/)


## Catalog Description


Risk Engineering. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental concepts, techniques, and applications of risk assessment and risk management for engineering systems; current industry practices for risk assessment of industrial facilities using qualitative and quantitative approaches are demonstrated through exercises and case studies from diverse engineering fields. Prerequisites: Graduate classification. Cross-listed with CHEN 660 and SENG 660.


## Additional Course Details


This course is designated as an online, distance learning course. It will be conducted concurrently with a 'face-to-face' course on the Texas A&M University campus. Distance students may participate in the course synchronously, via Zoom, during the scheduled lecture period.

Alternatively, distance learning students whose work schedules preclude synchronous participation in lectures may exercise the option to take the course asynchronously. All lectures will be recorded and available the same day. Due to the pace of the course, distance students must be diligent about watching the recorded lectures per the course schedule and adhere to the scheduled due dates for all assignments and exams. All course deliverables for distance-learning students will be submitted electronically. All exams for online students will have a live proctor and will be scheduled on the same day the exam is given to the oncampus section.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): Graduate classification. Cross Listing: CHEN 660 and SENG 660.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Apply appropriate probabilistic methods to evaluate component and system reliabilities. Analyze reliability estimates to recommend preferred system designs to minimize risk.

- Develop scenario models or logic trees (i.e., fault trees, event trees, failure modes and effects analysis, and Bayesian network models) to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate potential undesired outcomes in engineered systems. Evaluate results to recommend engineering solutions to reduce risk.

- Understand and apply quantitative methods for uncertainty analysis. Demonstrate methods to effectively communicate uncertainties associated with risk-informed decision-making.

- Use analytical or computational risk analysis techniques to develop a comprehensive, quantitative risk analysis of a real-world case study or problem.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials




This material Is: Required

Reliability and Risk Analysis

ISBN:

9781000864137

Authors:

Mohammad Modarres, Katrina Groth

Publisher:

CRC Press

Publication Date:

2023-04-26

Edition:

2nd Ed.

Notes:

E-book available through TAMU library



This material Is: Required

An Introduction to Reliability and Maintainability Engineering

ISBN:

9781478639336

Authors:

Charles E. Ebeling

Publisher:

Waveland Press

Publication Date:

2019-04-12

Edition:

3rd. Ed.


## Additional Instructional Materials




This Material is: Optional

Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers, WileyPLUS

ISBN:

9781119758723

Authors:

Douglas C. Montgomery, George C. Runger

Publisher:

Wiley

Publication Date:

2020-07-08

Edition:

7e

URL for Resource:

https://education.wiley.com

Notes:

This is a self-paced review for probability and statistics that is available via a WileyPlus course. Students can use this resource to ensure they have an appropriate probability and statistics background for success in this course.

Note: Students may register for a free two-week trial account on WileyPlus. If access is desired for an extended period, there is a minimal fee for a student license for five months of access to the WileyPlus course. Alternatively, lifetime access to the e-book is also available.


## Grading Policy


Your performance in the course is evaluated via multiple learning activities (exams, homework, a project, and lecture activities). The final course grade will be determined via the following weights:


### Course grading components




Method of Evaluation

Percent of Grade

Exams (Exam 1: 25%; Exam 2: 25%)

50%

Homework

30%

Project

15%

Activities

05%


### Grading scale (based on weighted total)




Grade

Range

A

90-100%

B

80-89%

C

70-79%

D

60-69%

F

&lt;60%


### Exams


There will be two exams during the course. All exams will be administered electronically, and students will be allowed to access the course textbooks, course notes, and software tools. Students are encouraged to develop their own reference/equation sheets and/or software tools to use during the exam. Only course resources, or those created by the individual student, may be accessed during the exam. All students must strictly adhere to the Aggie Honor Code during examinations. Per the course AI Statement contained in this syllabus, the use of AI tools during exams is strictly prohibited.

Exams for distance-learning students will be proctored live by the instructor or a Graduate Teaching Assistant. The exam period will be the same length as provided to the on-campus students. Additional instructions will be provided well in advance of the first exam.


### Exam Re-grading Policy


Students have 24 hours following the release of exam grades to resubmit corrected solutions for quantitative problems only for re-grading. This policy applies to errors in the student's original solution, not instructor grading errors. Non-quantitative and extra credit problems are not eligible for re-grading and will be clearly denoted as such on each exam. If a resubmitted solution is complete, fully correct, and shows all work to derive the new solution, the student may earn up to 50% of the points originally deducted for that problem, with a maximum of 20 total points recovered per exam.

The re-grading period is considered part of the exam period. Students must work on the corrections individually and MAY NOT consult with any other person, including current/former students, teaching assistants, graders, or professors, when developing their corrections. Any violation of this policy will be considered cheating and a violation of the Aggie Honor Code.


### Homework


There will be homework assignments during the course. Instructions, due dates and times, and points associated with each homework assignment will be announced during lectures and through Canvas. Study groups are encouraged, but each student is responsible for developing solutions and submitting them electronically via Canvas. No paper copies will be accepted.

Distance learning students will adhere to the same homework assignment due dates and times as the on-campus section.


### Project


This course includes a semester-long group project to analyze and present a quantitative risk analysis of an engineered system using the techniques and methods discussed in the course. Student groups (typically 3 students) will be formed by the instructor, based on the students' stated area(s) of interest.

The final deliverables for the course project are a written report and a presentation. Details regarding specific formats and requirements for all course project deliverables will be presented during lectures and also posted on Canvas. The grading rubric for evaluating the report and presentation will be posted on Canvas well in advance of the report due date.


### Lecture Activities


This course will utilize active learning methods during lecture periods, including group activities. To incentivize course participation and encourage student engagement, all students who attend a lecture and complete the associated lecture activity will be given full credit.

All lectures will be recorded during the in-class lecture period. Lecture videos will be available within 12 hours of the lecture, usually much sooner. All distance learning students are expected to maintain pace with the course and submit lecture activities within three days of the on-campus activity.

No late lecture activities will be accepted. If a student misses an activity due to a university-excused absence (see Student Rule 7), and has notified the instructor, in writing, in advance of the absence, they may complete and submit the activity for credit by 5:00 p.m. CT the day following the lecture period in which the activity was completed.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Homework and case study assignments submitted after the due date/time will not receive total credit, unless due to a university-excused absence (see attendance policy). Points will be deducted for assignments submitted past the due date and time on Canvas-equivalent to 20% of the total points possible for each day, or portion thereof, past the due date. Assignments submitted more than five days after the due date will not be accepted and a score of zero will be recorded for the assignment.


## Course Schedule

### Course topics




Topics

Topics

Elements of risk analysis and risk

mitigation

System risk analysis

Probability & statistics for risk analysis

Bayes networks/models



Topics

Topics

Component reliability analysis

Developing quantitative risk models

System reliability, maintainability, and

availability analysis

Case studies


### Course Schedule




Week

Topics

1

Elements of risk analysis and risk mitigation

2

Probability & statistics for risk analysis

3-5

Measuring risk: Component reliability analysis

6

Developing failure probabilities

Exam 1

7-8

Measuring risk: System reliability, availability, and maintainability

analysis

9-10

System risk assessment methods

11

Bayesian network development and analysis

Exam 2

12

Risk communication, Human Reliability Analysis (HRA)

13

Case study


## Additional Course Information

### Course materials and copyright:


The materials used in this course are copyrighted. "Materials" includes all items produced for this course, such as the syllabus, detailed course schedule, lecture slides, online lecture videos, homework or exam questions and solutions, and additional resources posted on the course site by the instructor. You may not copy or distribute these materials unless expressly granted permission by the author.
