## ISEN 661 Syllabus


Section 600 (65051) Network-Based Planning and Scheduling Systems Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 09:35AM

End Time: 10:50AM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Sergiy Butenko

Email:

butenko@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4037 ETB

Phone:

979-458-2333

Office Hours

TBA

Webpage:

https://butenko.engr.tamu.edu


## Catalog Description


Network-Based Planning and Scheduling Systems. (3-0). Credit 3. Fundamental theory, mathematical modeling, and algorithms of network flow models including shortest path models maximum flow and cost minimization models; out-of-kilter algorithm; pure and generalized network specializations of the primal simplex method; introduction to multi-commodity networks. Prerequisite: ISEN 620 or 622.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s):

ISEN 620 or 622.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- develop and apply network optimization theory and algorithms.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Recommended

Network Flows: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications

ISBN:

0-13-617549-X

Authors:

R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin

Publisher:

Prentice Hall


## Grading Policy


- Lecture quizzes: 10% of the final grade.

- Homework assignments: 15%.

- Three exams: 25 % each.

The weighted average will be calculated using the formula

weighted average = 0.1(lecture quiz average)+0.15(homework average)+0.75(exam average).

The letter grade will be assigned based on the weighted average as follows:

A: [90,100], B: [80,90), C: [70,80), D: [60,70), F: [0,60).


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Schedule


Week 1: Introduction to networks and graph theory basics

Weeks 2-3: Introduction to design and analysis of algorithms

Week 4: Minimum spanning tree problem

Weeks 5-6: Shortest paths

Weeks 7-8: Maximum flows

Weeks 9-10: Minimum-cost flows

Weeks 11-12: Assignments and matchings

Week 13: Maximum clique, independent sets, clique relaxations, and other NP- hard problems

Week 14-15: Additional topics (network science and other emerging research directions)