## ISEN 620 Syllabus


Section 601 (52745) Survey of Optimization Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 3:55PM

End Time: 5:10PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


David Gutman

Email:

dhgutman@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4075

Phone:

979-458-2339

Office Hours

TBD

Preferred Contact Method

Email (Do not call)


## Catalog Description


Survey of Optimization. (3-0). Credit 3. Theory and numerical methods for deterministic linear and nonlinear optimization; topics include linear programming, unconstrained-nonlinear optimization, constrained-nonlinear optimization, Lagrange and K-K-T conditions, and numerical algorithms. Prerequisite: MATH 304 or MATH 311.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s):

MATH 304 or MATH 311.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Analyze and apply linear and nonlinear programming theory and algorithms.

- Formulate linear and nonlinear optimization models from real-world problems.

- Solve small-scale optimization problems by hand and utilize optimization software to solve large-scale problems.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

## Grading Policy

### Assessments


Your grade will be based upon:

1. Midterm I (25% of total grade subject to replacement) : You will have a midterm that will occur during one of the lectures in roughly late September/early October. See replacement policy under Final Exam, Part I. If you are unable to take this exam for any reason then your Final Exam, Part I grade will replace it.
2. Midterm II (25% of total grade subject to replacement) : You will have a midterm that will occur during one of the recitation periods located roughly in the middle of November. See replacement policy under Final Exam, Part I.
3. Final Exam, Part I (25% of total grade) : The final exam will have two sections that will be graded separately. The first section will cover the same material as midterm I. If your grade on this part exceeds your grade on midterm I, then it will also replace your midterm I grade.
4. Final Exam, Part II (25% of total grade) : The second section will cover the same material as midterm II. If your grade on this part exceeds your grade on midterm II, then it will also replace your midterm II grade.
Attendance is not graded.

#### Grading

Letter grades will be determined according to the following numeric scale. Grading Scheme
This material Is: Recommended
Operations Research
Authors:
Wayne L. Winston, Jeffrey B. Goldberg Letter grades may be curved upward to reflect the performance of the entire class.

Letter Grade
Total Score
A
&gt;90%
B
80-89.99%
C
70-79.99%
D
60-69.99%
F
&lt;60%

#### Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

#### Course Specific Late Work Policy

Late work is accepted under no circumstances except those dictated by university and student rules.

#### Course Schedule

##### Course Schedule

##### Course Schedule


Unit
#
Title
1
Introduction
2
Basic Optimization Modeling
3
Introduction to Gurobi
4
Classic Problems, Part I
5
Classic Problems, Part II
6
Graphical LP Solving
7
Simplex Method
8
Sensitivity Analysis
9
IP Modeling
10
Networks

Unit
#
Title
11
IP Algorithms
12
Non-linear Programming

##### Tentative Exam Dates

Midterm Exam #1: 10/27
Midterm Exam #2: 11/24

#### Additional Course Information

##### Ungraded Homework

Each course topic may be accompanied by an optional, ungraded homework. I will not post solutions to the homework. However, we will offer feedback on your (optionally) submitted solutions. This is you best opportunity to get feedback on your understanding of course material. I must emphasize that turning in or not turning in the optional homework will have NO impact on your grade. Moreover, your performance on the homework will have no impact on your grade.
These homeworks must be turned in by the assigned deadline.

##### Electronic Device Use Policy

The use of any and all electronic devices is explicitly forbidden with a single exception. You may use an tablet or laptop computer to take notes but only if you sit in one of the front X rows, where the number X will be determined by the conclusion of the second class session. If you are sitting in one of these rows and using one of your devices for tasks other than note taking then this will be considered an electronic device use policy violation.
The first electronic device use policy violation will result in a warning. Each subsequent violation will result in a one letter course grade deduction.

##### Academic Integrity

Any instance of cheating or plagiarism will be referred to the Aggie Honor Council. The recommended penalty will be failure of the course.