## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 2:20PM

End Time: 3:35PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ETB 1013

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details




Farzan Sasangohar

Email:

sasangohar@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4079

Phone:

979-458-2337

Office Hours

Tuesdays: 11-12 or by appointment


## Catalog Description


Special Topics in... Credit 1 to 4. Selected topics in an identified area of industrial engineering. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Approval of instructor.




## Additional Course Details


This course is a survey of emerging topics in healthcare human-systems engineering. The course uses the Design for X (DfX) methodology to discuss a wide range of contexts, technologies, and population-specific criteria (X's) that must be considered in designing a safe and usable healthcare ecosystem. Applications of Human Factors delves into critical and emergent issues in healthcare and patient safety, and how the field of human factors and ergonomics (HFE) plays a role in this domain. Typical design and operational problems in healthcare domains, along with their HFE solutions, will be highlighted. Students will apply HFE principles to design problems, and a research project will allow them to explore a relevant HFE topic in depth.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 330 or Approval of Instructor Approval of instructor.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- The students will be able to describe the role and scope of human factors/ergonomics in healthcare.

- The students will be able to apply human factors engineering methods to the analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation of healthcare systems.

- The students will be able to critically examine several emerging topics related to HF/E in healthcare and their implications and consequences for productivity, safety, wellness, and satisfaction in healthcare settings.

- The students will be able to exhibit effective teamwork and sharpen their communication skills.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials

## Grading Policy

### Grade Determination:

#### 40% Research report (individual)

#### 30% Homework assignments (individual)

#### 20% Reflections (individual)

#### 10% Practicum (team)


Grades will be calculated on the basis of total points earned.  Grades may be curved based on class average, such that the point thresholds may be lowered from the following standard:

A: 90-100%  B: 80-89%  C: 70-79%  D: 60-69%  F: 59% and lower

Research Report

This material Is: Recommended

Design for Health: Applications of Human Factors

ISBN:

978-0128164273

Authors:

Sethumadhavan, A., Sasangohar, F.

Publisher:

Academic Press

Edition:

1st

Undergraduate students will conduct an original scoping or narrative review. Graduate students will work individually to conduct an original study and will generate a research paper on a topic relevant to the course, due near the end of the semester. A research report proposal will be due around the 3 rd week of class, so we can assess the relevance and depth of the topic and provide guidance. Further details on this report will be given early in the semester.


### Homework assignment:


There will be approximately three homework assignments, designed to give you practice in applying human factors methods learned in the course. Some but not all of the assignments may be graded (the instructor will specify when they are graded). Assignments will be posted on Canvas and announced in lecture and/or via email. Due dates for each exam will be provided when they are issued and will generally be within 1 week. Unless otherwise specified, completed assignments should be submitted on Canvas.


### Reflections:


Students will work on five assignments that reflect on the topic of the week and research healthcare applications of the concepts discussed.


### Practicum:


Students will work in teams of 3 to prepare and deliver a detailed case study on one of the course topics. The lecture should cover background research and an in-depth case study that illustrates the application of HF/E to their chosen topic.


### Re-grading Policy:


Students have 1 week after grades are released to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11-point font, single spacing) and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Reports that are submitted after the established deadline will not receive any credit.


## Course Schedule


Tentative Schedule



Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

0: Course Introduction

none

Week 1

Homework 0 Due 8/30

1: Introduction to HFE

in Healthcare

none

2: Medical Device Safety

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 1

Week 2

Reflection 1 Due 9/6

3: Medication Safety

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 2

Week 3

Project Proposal Due

9/13

4: Digital Health

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 3

HTA Packet on Canvas

Week 4

Reflection 2 Due 9/20





Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

5: Mobile Health

Technologies

Methods Lecture:

Hierarchical Task

Analysis

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 5

Week 5

Project Outline

Due

9/27

6: eHealth and

Telehealth

Methods Lecture: Digital

Prototyping using Figma

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 4

Week 6

Methods Lecture: Conducting Literature Reviews

Week 7

Homework 1 Due

10/11

7: Effective Care

Collaboration

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 6

8: Healthcare Systems:

Critical Care

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 7

Week 8

9: Healthcare Systems:

Emergencies

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 8

Week 9

Homework 2 Due

10/25

10: Resilience in

Healthcare

Methods Lecture:

Usability Testing and

Heuristic Evaluation

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 9

Usability Testing Packet on

Canvas

Week 10

Project Draft

Due 11/1

11: Collaborative Work

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 10

Week 11

Reflection 3 Due 11/8



Topic

Text/source material

and references

Approximate

Week/deadlines

12: Healthcare

Workflows

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 13

Week 12

Reflection 5 Due 11/15

13: Other topics:

Interruptions, safety

culture/climate, systems

engineering methods,

special populations,

mental health

Sethumadhavan &

Sasangohar, Ch. 17

Week 13

Homework 3 Due

11/22

No class on 11/25 & 11/27 (Reading Day &

Thanksgiving)

Week 14

Project Paper Due on

11/24

Practicum Presentations

Week 15

Reviews Due on 12/3


## Additional Course Information


All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, "documents" means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, quizzes, exams, problem sets, slide sets, and all materials appearing on the class website or sent to you via email. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit enterprise.
