## Course Information


Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: MW

Start Time: 08:00AM

End Time: 08:50AM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Amarnath Banerjee

Email:

banerjee@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4041 ETB

Phone:

979-458-2341

Office Hours

TBD


### Preferred Contact Method


All communication handled via email and announcements will be via email and/or Canvas




## Catalog Description


Simulation Methods and Applications. (2-3). Credit 3. Fundamental methodologies of simulation modeling; random number and variate generation, statistical analysis of model output, and discrete event modeling using a commercial simulation language. Prerequisite: STAT 212 or STAT 601.


## Additional Course Details


The catalog prerequisites are STAT 212 or STAT 601. A student should have passed STAT 601 or STAT 630 or ISEN 609 or (STAT 211 and STAT 212) or equivalent, AND have knowledge of computer programming.

It is essential that students have had a semester course in calculus-based probability and statistics covering at a minimum (1) distributions (single variable and joint probabilities) including the use of PDF's, PMF's and CDF's in obtaining probability statements and expectations and (2) statistics including confidence intervals and hypothesis testing.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): STAT 212 or STAT 601.

The catalog prerequisites are STAT 212 or STAT 601. A student should have passed STAT 601 or STAT 630 or ISEN 609 or (STAT 211 and STAT 212) or equivalent, AND have knowledge of computer programming.

It is essential that students have had a semester course in calculus-based probability and statistics covering at a minimum (1) distributions (single variable and joint probabilities) including the use of PDF's, PMF's and CDF's in obtaining probability statements and expectations and (2) statistics including confidence intervals and hypothesis testing.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Understand the fundamental methodologies of discrete event (processoriented) simulation modeling,

- Understand the key statistical issues involved in simulation data preparation and the analysis of simulation output, and

- Become familiar with modeling using a commercial language (Simio).


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required

Simulation Modeling and Analysis, Sixth Edition

ISBN:

9781264268252

Authors:

Averill M. Law

Publisher:

McGraw Hill Professional

Publication Date:

2025-02-21

Notes:

5th Edition of the book will also work.


## Additional Instructional Materials


This Material is: Optional

Simio and Simulation

Authors:

Jeffrey Smith, David Sturrock

Publisher:

Createspace Independent Publishing Platform

Edition:

7th Edition

URL for Resource:

https://textbook.simio.com/SASMAA7/

Notes:

The book is available online.


## Grading Policy

### Grade Components


The four exams are worth a total of 80 points. There is no final exam for this course. The lab assignments are worth 12 points. Quizzes are worth 8 points.

- Exam 1 and Exam 2 are each worth 18 points. Lab Exam 1 and Lab Exam 2 are each worth 22 points.

- There will be 12 lab assignments. Each lab assignment will be worth 1 point. Submissions will not be accepted after the deadline.

- There will be regular quizzes during the semester. The weight of each quiz is dependent on the number of questions in the quiz. All the quizzes together will be worth 8 points. Quizzes must be taken during the availability time window.


### Grade Assignment


- Grades assigned are: A for 90% - 100%, B for 80% - 89.9%, C for 70% 79.9%, D for 60% - 69.9%, F for below 60%.

- Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days of the return of the graded material. No grade review request will be accepted beyond the two business days limit.

- Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas.


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Late work will not be accepted and will result in a zero grade unless there is a university excused absence.


## Course Schedule




Week Topics

Important

Events

1

Introduction to simulation and modeling;

relationship with probability and statistics, and

queueing theory.

Lab1: covering introduction to Simio, developing

basic queueing models

Lab 1 due

2

Introduction continued. Output Analysis

Lab 2: more Simio constructs, simulating a pull

(Kanban) system

Lab 2 due

3

Output Analysis: two different types of systems,

properties of output data

Lab3: counting, branching, custom run setup, plots,

interpreting results

Lab 3 due

4

Output Analysis: developing confidence intervals,

system comparison, non-terminating system

analysis

Lab4: system comparison, data tables, non-

stationary arrival process, branching

Lab 4 due

5

Output Analysis: non-terminating system analysis;

Input Analysis: Steps, options

Lab5: user defined statistics

Lab 5 due

6

Input Analysis: non-stationary arrival process, data

fitting

Lab6: introduction to processes

Lab 6 due, Exam

1

7

Input Analysis: Goodness of Fit tests

Lab Exam 1


### Weekly Topics




Week Topics

Important

Events

8

Random Numbers: importance, generation of

random numbers; tests for RNs

Lab7: Use of lists, reliability logic

Lab 7 due

9

Random Variates: different techniques for random

variate generation

Lab8: sequences, transporters, linking with data

tables

Lab 8 due

10

Random Variates continued; Monte Carlo

Simulation

Lab9: another assignment on sequences,

transporters, linking with data tables;

emphasis on separation of data from model, use of

relational tables

Lab 9 due

11

Verification and Validation

Lab10: non-stationary arrival process, work

schedule, function, use of processes

Lab 10 due

12

Simulation-Based Optimization; introduction to

Variance Reduction Technique

Lab11: simulation-based optimization using

OptQuest, ranking and selection using

KN method

Lab 11 due

13

Variance Reduction Techniques

Lab Exam 2

14

Task Sequences, introduction to Agent Based

Simulation

Lab 12: mixed model simulation - fluid flows

combined with discrete event

simulation, more use of Processes

Lab 12 due,

Exam 2


## Additional Course Information

### A Note About Homework


There will be homework assignments that will be assigned regularly. Homework will not be collected. It is in your interest to work on the homework problems and develop the solutions. The solutions will be posted for you to compare your work.

You can expect to see quiz questions and exam problems based on the homework problems.


### Course Material and Copyright Statement


All documents used in this course are copyrighted. Here, "documents" means all materials generated for this class, including, but not limited to, syllabi, quizzes, exams, problem sets, slide sets, and all materials appearing on the class web site or sent to you via email. Because these materials are copyrighted, you do not have the right to copy any of them for any purpose other than your own personal academic use unless I expressly grant permission. In particular, course materials may not be given or sold to any for-profit or not-for-profit enterprise.
