## ISEN 631 Syllabus


Section 600 (59189) Cognitive Systems Engineering Spring 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Credit Hours:

3

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Thomas Ferris

Email:

tferris@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4081 ETB

Phone:

9794582340

Office Hours

Thursday 3 - 5

Preferred Contact Method

email


## Catalog Description


Cognitive Systems Engineering. (3-0). Credit 3. Analyze how artifacts, displays, social interaction and factors such as stress, time pressure, competing demands and uncertainty affect human cognitive functions such as perception, attention, memory, decision-making and problem-solving in joint human-machine systems; user-centered design techniques, research and evaluation methods introduced and applied to a design project. Prerequisites: ISEN 635, ISEN 430/ISEN 630, or approval of instructor.




## Additional Course Details


This course will provide an overview of the field of Cognitive Systems Engineering (CSE), which concerns how humans and technologies interact to perform cognitive work in sociotechnical systems. It will introduce underlying theory and methods in CSE that are applicable to the design of processes, tools, and technologies to support cognitive functions such as communication, planning, decision-making, and problem-solving in complex work domains. It will analyze how artifacts, displays, social interactions, and factors such as stress, time pressure, competing demands, and uncertainty affect performance of cognitive systems. Examples of current trends in CSE research will be discussed. Task analysis and human-centered design methods will be applied to a group project throughout the semester.


## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s): ISEN 635, ISEN 430/ISEN 630, or approval of instructor.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- demonstrate applied knowledge of sociotechnical systems engineering to define and analyze the interactions of humans and other system elements in real-world work systems

- demonstrate an understanding of historical foundations, as well as current hot topics and trends, in cognitive systems engineering research through review and discussion of published technical works

- demonstrate an understanding of human behavioral modes, and how errors emerge from system interactions

- demonstrate an understanding of system design strategies that champion principles of resilience engineering, for example, through error management techniques

- apply qualitative data collection and formal task analytical methodologies to collect human data and identify sources of system breakdowns, as well as propose theory-based potential system improvements

- demonstrate creativity and communication skills via a semester-long project with an in-class presentation

- demonstrate applied knowledge of course concepts in identifying humansystems interaction problems with an existing technology, and in proposing human-centered redesign solutions


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Optional

No Textbook Needed


## Grading Policy

### Grade determination


20% Reading responses and Discussion board

50% Exams: midterm (25%) and final exam (25%)

30% Semester project deliverables

Grades will be calculated according to total points earned. The points can be curved based on class average and may be lower than the following standard (out of a total of 100 percentage points).

A: 90-100% B: 80-89% C: 70-79% D: 60-69% F: 59% and lower


### Reading Responses:


With few exceptions, there will be an assigned reading related to the lecture material for each class. The readings will be posted on Canvas. As a way to jump-start class discussion, you will need to submit a reading response (RR) for each assigned reading via Canvas by 12:00 PM (noon) on the day BEFORE the associated lecture, unless otherwise specified. These responses must include header material (name, RR, date) and two clearly distinguished sections (I suggest using the following headers):

1. Discussion point(s), which should be at least one of the following:


# A. An insightful question about the reading. Time permitting, I will address as many of these questions as I can in lecture, and classmates will have a chance to respond as well.

## B. A comment about how the reading relates to other course concepts or to an example/anecdote from your own life experience.

1. Summary of the reading, in your own words (copying verbatim from the reading or other sources is considered plagiarism and will be treated according to the Academic Misconduct Policy). This summary is primarily meant to serve as a study aid (e.g., when reviewing for exams), and so should be organized in a way that best helps you. At a minimum, include the main messages of the reading as well as other relevant and/or interesting concepts discussed.
An RR template and grading rubric will be posted in Canvas. The lengths of  each  of  the  Discussion  points  and  Summary  sections  can  be  flexible,  but combined  should  be approximately  1  page  in  length . The  reading  response exercises are designed to support assimilation and retention of the course material, and also to identify  emphases for me to cover in lecture. We will also respond to each other's discussion points online, and continue discussions in lecture.

## Discussion Board:

As a means to jumpstart class discussion, the discussion points from the Reading Responses should be posted on Discussion Boards (DBs) in Canvas. In addition to posting  discussion  points/questions,  students  will  also  read  and  respond  to  your classmates' points/questions. The specific format for this activity is TBD (dependent on the course enrollment size) and will be communicated in the first week of class. DB responses will be assessed and associated with points in the 'Reading response and Discussion board' grade category.

## Exams

There  will  be  two  open-note,  take-home  written  exams:  a  midterm  which  is tentatively  scheduled  for  Week  8  (25%  of  final  grade),  and  a  comprehensive  final exam due on or before Finals Week (25% of final grade). Each exam will consist primarily of short answer and/or essay questions that emphasize application of the material discussed in lecture and assigned readings. Exam dates can be flexible in cases of need but must be communicated to Dr. Ferris prior to the exam's scheduled week.

## Semester Project :

Teams of students will collaborate on a project analyzing the cognitive work performed in a sociotechnical system of their choice. This project will take part in 3 phases, each with its own deliverables. Note that the 3-phase plan below is tentative and may change due to the availability of resources (any changes will be communicated in class and via announcements).
- Phase 0: Propose sociotechnical systems of interest for this project. Dr. Ferris will provide feedback and guide the selection.
- Deliverable: Project proposal (5% of project grade)
- Phase 1: Students will define/model the sociotechnical system and perform a front end analysis on that system. This will serve to inform the in situ data collection and guide the task analysis in Phase 2.
- Deliverable: Front end analysis report (25% of project grade)
- Phase 2: Students will apply observational and task analysis techniques to formally describe system tasks/functions that are critical to the main outputs of interest in the sociotechnical system. In addition to a task analysis description, the report deliverable will include identification of subtasks that are problematic or could likely be improved with different technologies, training, or procedures.
- Deliverable: Task analysis description and report (30% of project grade)
- Phase 3: Students will design a 'solution' to improve the effectiveness of the analyzed system according to shortcomings that were identified in Phase 2. This solution may take several forms, for example, it may involve the development of technology to aid humans in the system (e.g., software tool, external memory aid, information visualization), a procedural change, or a training method. An additional requirement may be for the solution to be evaluated using techniques discussed in class (e.g., usability study, focus groups/interviews/surveys, mini-experiments). Project groups will work with Dr. Ferris to determine the appropriate scope for this activity.
- Deliverables: Solution and evaluation report (30% of project grade), in-class presentation (10% of project grade)
Each team member is expected to contribute to each phase of the project and each deliverable. Students will be required to submit peer evaluation forms for the members of their team, and individual grades will be adjusted up/down based on the combined evaluation forms from all team members. Students are strongly encouraged to contact Dr. Ferris early on if there are any problems with/between team members that require attention.

## Re-grading Policy

Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request in writing. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and  must  clearly indicate the  relevant  problem(s)  and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested re-grade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.

## Late Work Policy

Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).

## Course Specific Late Work Policy

Dr. Ferris does not allow anything to be submitted late without a University-excused absence. Items that are submitted after the posted due date/time will not receive any credit. Exceptions can be made in accordance with university rules (https://studentrules.tamu.edu/rule07/). In these cases, documentation of the circumstances will be required.

## Course Schedule

Schedule of Topics

### Schedule of Topics


Week
Lecture Topic
Notes (RRs/DBs subject
to change)
Week 1
Jan 12, 14,
16
Course introduction
Human-centered design
Introduction to Cognitive
Systems Engineering
Bio
RR1/DB1: Woods & Roth,
1988
Week 2
Jan 19, 21,
23
Humans and sociotechnical
systems
Intro to analysis and design
methods
RR2/DB2: Wilson, 2013
RR3/DB3: Wickens et al.,
2004 (Ch. 3)

Week 3
Jan 26, 28,
30
Semester Project
Introduction
Cognitive Task Analysis
Case study: NICU incubator
design
RR4/DB4: Bisantz & Roth,
2007
RR5/DB5: Ferris & Shepley,
2013
Week 4
Feb 2, 4, 6
Human performance: Skill-
Rule-Knowledge Framework
Human error: models and
classification
RR6/DB6: Rasmussen,
1983
RR7/DB7: Reason, 1990
(Ch. 3)
Project proposal due
Week 5
Feb 9, 11, 13
Design-induced error and
error management
Resilience Engineering
RR8/DB8: Reason, 1990
(Ch. 7)
Week 6
Feb 16, 18,
20
Human-automation
interaction models and key
concepts
Trust in human-automation
systems
System breakdowns and
ironies of automation
RR9/DB9: Lee & See, 2004
RR10/DB10: Ferris et al.,
2010
Week 7
Feb 23, 25,
27
Bridging the Gulfs of
Execution and Evaluation
Display/interface principles
and usability
RR12/DB12: Norman, 1993
(Ch. 3)
RR13/DB13: Smith et al.,
2006
Project Phase 1
deliverable due

Week 8
March 2, 4, 6
Midterm review: Concept
mapping
Midterm Exam
Review the concept
mapping material
Week 9
SPRING BREAK - NO CLASS
Week 10
Mar 16, 18,
20
Ecological Interface Design
TBD/Slack
RR14/DB14: Vicente, 2002
Week 11
Mar 23, 25,
27
Directed attention and
dynamic fault management
Display/interface design to
support attention and task
management
RR15/DB15: Woods, 1995
RR16/DB16: Ferris & Sarter,
2011
Week 12
Mar 30, Apr
1, 3
Decision Making: models
and human tendencies
Decision Support Systems
RR17/DB17: Kahneman &
Klein, 2009
RR18/DB18: Gigerenzer &
Goldstein, 1996
Project Phase 2
deliverable due
Week 13
Apr 6, 8, 10
Emotion and Stress factors
TBD/slack…
RR19/DB19: Lottridge et al.,
2011
Week 14
Apr 13, 15,
17
TBD/slack/Project
presentations
RR/DB: TBD

Week 15
Apr 20, 22,
24
… Apr 28
redefined day
Project presentations
Project Phase 3
deliverable due
May 4
Final exam due by 11:59 PM on Monday, 5/4/26

## Additional Course Information

### Re-grading Policy :

Students have 1 week after grades are released for a homework, quiz, or exam to submit a re-grade request via email to Dr. Ferris. This request must not exceed 1 page (11 point font, single spacing), and must clearly indicate the relevant problem(s) and justification for why you think re-grading is warranted. Note that a requested regrade may result in further point deductions if new errors are discovered.