## ISEN 613 Syllabus


Section 601 (34731) Engineering Data Analysis

Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 11:10AM

End Time: 12:25PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 266

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Joseph Geunes

Email:

geunes@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4024

Phone:

(979) 862-9114

Office Hours

TBD


## Catalog Description


Engineering Data Analysis. (3-0). Credit 3. Selected topics in probability and data analysis for quality in engineering problems; measurement principles, data collection and data analysis to solve quality engineering problems; introduction to courses in the assurance sciences-reliability, maintainability, quality control and robust design.




## Course Learning Outcomes


At the end of this course, students should be able to

- (1) Learn the basic techniques of statistical learning and predictive modeling;

- (2) Learn the principles of building and validating modern statistical models for engineering applications;

- (3) Demonstrate your knowledge by implementing existing techniques, developing new techniques to solve real-world problems, and conducting a comprehensive and insightful review study on any emerging area of statistical learning and data mining.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required

An Introduction to Statistical Learning

Subtitle:

With Applications in Python

URL for Resource:

https://www.statlearning.com/


## Grading Policy


Grades assigned are: A for 90% - 100%, B for 80% - 89.9%, C for 70% - 79.9%, D for 60% - 69.9%, F for below 60%.

Any disagreements regarding a grade received on any graded material must be discussed within two business days from posting of the grades. No grade will be changed beyond the two business days limit. Grades will be maintained in the gradebook within Canvas.

Homework is an important element of this course and should be performed individually. Sharing of work in any manner is a violation of academic integrity. Homework are supposed to be independent work, and use of solutions from websites or other resources are prohibited. Late submission of homework is strictly not allowed and the link to submit your work will promptly be unavailable after the scheduled due date. The course assessment will be based on

- 30% Homework

- 35% Midterm Exam

- 35% Final Project


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Schedule

### Course Schedule




Week

Topics

Required Reading

1

Course overview

Ch 1, Ch 2.3

2

Review of probability

& statistics

Notes

3

Basic ideas of

statistical learning

Ch 2.1, Ch 2.2

4

Linear regression

Ch 3

5

Linear regression

Ch 3

6

Classification (logistic

regression, LDA,

QDA, KNN)

Ch 4

7

Classification (logistic

regression, LDA,

QDA, KNN)

Ch 4

8

Cross validation and

Bootstrap

Ch 5

9

Subset selection

Ch 6.1

10

Ridge regression &

LASSO

Ch 6.2



Week

Topics

Required Reading

11

Tree-based methods

Ch 8

12

Support vector

machines

Ch 9

13

Clustering

Ch 12.1, 12.4

14

Principal Component

Analysis (PCA)

Ch 12.2

15
