## ISEN 663 Syllabus


Section 600 (63016) Engineering Management Control Systems Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: T

Start Time: 5:30PM

End Time: 8:00PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 445

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details




Michael Do

Email:

mddo@tamu.edu

Office Location:

ETB 4078

Phone:

979-458-2377

Office Hours

10-12pm Tuesday, Thursday


## Catalog Description


Engineering Management Control Systems. (3-0). Credit 3. Integration of human relations, planning and control concepts, systems analysis and design, and principles of management oriented toward engineering functions within an organization; organizational design and administration as they impact along the product life cycle, i.e., research, design, development, production and use.




## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- Identify and represent a system of interest using systems engineering (SE) principles and practices.

- Analyze and design using SE methods, frameworks, and tools.

- Leverage the appropriate management control system principles and practices to control and manage the behavior of the organization or system.

- Identify the organizational elements endemic to the management of a largescale complex system.

- Identify key management control systems elements that are critical to the success of both sustaining operations endemic to and projects undertaken by the organization or system.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required

Management Control Systems

Authors:

Kenneth Merchant and Wim Van Der Stede

Publisher:

Pearson

Publication Date:

2024

Edition:

5th Edition


## Grading Policy


This table provides the grading components and percentages.



Component

Percentage

Class Discussions

25%

Assignments

25%

Semester Project

25%

Final Exam

25%

Total

100%


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Specific Late Work Policy


Late assignments will be accepted but will lose 20% of its value.


## Course Schedule


This table provides the weekly lecture topics with notes.



Week

Topic

Notes

Week 1

Introduction, Systems

Engineering Principles,

Organization and

Controls

Week 2

Organization Fit and

Function; IDEF Modeling

Tools

Week 3

Organization Form;

Models and Structures

Labor Day, No Class -

9/7

Week 4

Organization Design and

Analysis



Week

Topic

Notes

Week 5

Organization Design and

Analysis

Week 6

Value Stream Mapping

Introduction

Week 7

Value Stream Mapping

Development

Week 8

Value Stream Mapping

Development

Week 9

Introduction to MCS

Frameworks; Objects of

Control

Week 10

Costs of Controls;

Financial Responsibility

Centers; Incentives

Week 11

Financial and Budget

Controls; MCS and

Project Management

Week 12

Pre-Action Control:

Planning + Leadership +

Cases

Week 13

Socio-Technical

Systems/Highly Reliable

Organizations

Week 14

AI and NextGEN ORG

Design + Ethics

Reading Day, No Class -

11/25

Thanksgiving Day, No

Class - 11/26

Week 15

AI and NextGEN ORG

Design + Ethics

Last Day of Class - 12/3

Week 16

Final Exam

12/8


## Course Specific Makeup Work Policy


Any make up assignments or exams must be completed prior to assigning final course grades.
