## ISEN 622 Syllabus


Section 600 (19843) Linear Programming Fall 2026 - College Station


## Course Information


Meeting Times:

Meeting Type: LEC

Meeting Days: TR

Start Time: 11:10AM

End Time: 12:25PM

Start Date: 08/24/2026

End Date: 12/10/2026

Meeting Location:

ZACH 345

Credit Hours:

3


## Instructor Details


Sergiy Butenko

Email:

butenko@tamu.edu

Office Location:

4037 ETB

Phone:

979-458-2333

Office Hours

TBA

Webpage:

https://butenko.engr.tamu.edu/


## Catalog Description


Linear Programming. (3-0). Credit 3. Development of the mathematics and algorithms associated with linear programming; convex sets and cones, polyhedral sets, duality theory, sensitivity analysis, simplex, revised simplex and dual simplex methods; also covered are bounded variables, column generation, decomposition, integer programming; computer assignment. Prerequisite: MATH 304.




## Course Prerequisites


Prerequisite/Corequisite(s):

MATH 304.


## Course Learning Outcomes


Upon completion of this course, the learner will be able to:

- develop and apply linear programming (LP) theory and algorithms;

- formulate linear optimization models;

- solve small-scale LPs by hand and large-scale LPs using optimization software.


## Special Course Designation


None


## Textbook and/or Resource Materials


This material Is: Required

ISEN 622 Course Handbook

Authors:

Sergiy Butenko

URL for Resource:

https://drive.google.com/file/d/13qVYKm\_5vPzPGScfrdH4jhPD9BFOyRfg/view?usp=sharing


## Grading Policy


- Lecture quizzes: 10% of the final grade.

- Homework assignments: 15%.

- Three in-class exams: 25% each.

The final letter grades will be calculated using the formula

weighted average = 0.1(lec quiz average)+0.15(hw quiz average)+0.75(exam average)

and will be assigned as follows. A: [90,100], B: [80,90), C: [70,80), D: [60,70), F: [0,60).

Optional Final Exam will be offered as a chance to improve your final grade. The exam will consist of the problems of the same types as the three exams given during the semester. You will be able to choose which problems to solve. You will have two hours to complete the exam, and the score for each problem you attempt will replace the score you obtained for the problem of the same type in the original exam (whenever the new score is higher).


## Late Work Policy


Work submitted by a student as makeup work for an excused absence is not considered late work and is exempt from the late work policy (Student Rule 7).


## Course Schedule


T 8/25 Lec.1: Introduction

R 8/27 Lec. 2: Introduction to Optimization Software

T 9/1 Lec. 3: LP Modeling

R 9/3 Lec. 4: Graphical Method

T 9/8 Homework #1 due date

T 9/8 Lec. 5: Simplex Method: An Introduction

R 9/10 Lec. 6: Simplex Method: Iteration and Termination

T 9/15 Lec. 7: Simplex Method: Initialization

R 9/17 Lec. 8: Analysis of the Simplex Method

T 9/22 Homework #2 due date

T 9/22 Lec. 9: Properties of Polyhedra

R 9/24 Lec. 10: Representation of Polyhedra

T 9/29 Exam #1

R 10/1 Lec. 11: LP Duality: Introduction

T 10/6 Homework #3 due date

T 10/6 Lec. 12: Complementary slackness

R 10/8 Lec. 13: Simplex Method in the Matrix Form

T 10/13 Lec. 14: Sensitivity analysis

R 10/15 Lec. 15: Sensitivity analysis

T 10/20 Homework #4 due date

T 10/20 Lec. 16: Gomory Cut

R 10/22 Lec. 17: Parametric Linear Programming

T 10/27 Exam #2

R 10/29 Lec. 18: Farkas' Lemma and KKT Conditions

T 11/3 Homework #5 due date

T 11/3 Lec. 19: The Primal-Dual Simplex Method

R 11/5 Lec. 20: Column Generation

T 11/10 Lec. 21: Dantzig-Wolfe Decomposition

R 11/12 Lec. 22: Dantzig-Wolfe Decomposition

T 11/17 Homework #6 due date

T 11/17 Lec. 23: Integer Programming Modeling

R 11/19 Lec. 24: Modeling Either/Or Conditions

T 11/24 Lec. 25: Two-Stage Stochastic LP

R 12/3 Homework #7 due date

R 12/3 Exam #3
